 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Awakening of Intelligence 
Copyright © 1973 by Krishna murti Foundation Trust Ltd.  
 
 
 
 
J. KRISHNAMURTI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE AWAKENING OF 
INTELLIGENCE QUOTATIONS  
 
“Intelligence is not personal, is not the outcome of argument, belief, opinion 
or reason. Intelligence comes into being when the brain disc overs its fallibility, 
when it discovers what it is capable of, and what it is not. Now what is the 
relationship of intelligence with this new dimension? ... The different dimension 
can only operate through intelligence: if there is not that intelligence it cannot 
operate. So in daily life it can only operate where in telligence is functioning”—
Part VIII . 
 
“When (thought) sees that it is incapable of discoveri ng something new, that 
very perception is the seed of intelligence, isn’t it? That is intelligence: ‘I cannot 
do’. I thought I could do a lot of things, and I can in a ce rtain direction, but in a 
totally new direction I cannot do an ything. The discovery of that is 
intelligence”—Part VIII . 
 
“Thought is of time, in telligence is not of time. Intelligence is 
immeasurable”—Part VII. 
 
“Intelligence comes into be ing when the mind, the heart and the body are 
really harmonious”— Part VIII. 
 
“Is there the awakening of that intelligence? If there is  ... then it will operate, 
then you don’t have to sa y, ‘What am I to do?’ Perhaps there have been a 
thousand persons here during  these three weeks who have listened. If they really 
live that, do you know what’s going to happen? We should change the world”—
Part VIII . 
 
“When there is that supr eme energy, which is inte lligence, is there death?”—
Part VII . EDITOR’S NOTE  
 
For many years J. Krishnamu rti spoke to audiences of all sorts, as well as to 
individuals and to smaller groups, in Amer ica, Europe and Indi a. This book was 
planned to indicate the wide range of hi s teaching and discussions. As the Talks 
were always extempore, with intercha nge of question and answer, the reports 
printed here were taken fro m tapes, so that the exac t words and phrases were 
accurately recorded. Th ey have been edited suffici ently to presen t a readable 
page, with some elimination of redundancies. 
Several of the themes in these chapte rs are taken up in a different way in 
Conversations with four notable people interested in Krishnamurti’s ideas. These 
personal interviews are also reporte d from tapes recorded at the time. 
A word should be said about the Dialogues and the small group Discussion in 
Chapter 10. The Dialogues are not disc ussions in the sense of debates or 
arguments, but are free exchanges betwee n people with a common aim who are 
intent on understanding together with Krishnamurti fundamental problems. For 
instance, the five Dialogues at Saanen  follow a series of seven Talks and 
continue the themes there initiated, clarifyi ng or probing the issues further. It was 
at Saanen, Switzerland, for many years, that people gathered from all over the 
world to share some w eeks with Krishnamurti. 
The small group Discussion (Chapter 10)  took place at Brockwood Park in 
Hampshire, England, where there is an educational centre a nd school for young 
people founded by Krishnamur ti. This discussion was w ith people fo r the most 
part long connected with Krishnamurti in his work. 
We are indebted to a number of helper s in the recording, transcribing and 
editing of this book. 
 
George and Cornelia Wingfield Digby CONTENTS  
 
AMERICA  
 
Part I 
Two Conversations: J. Krishnamur ti and Professor Jacob Needleman 
 
1  THE ROLE OF THE TEACHER  
2  ON INNER SPACE ; ON TRADITION AND DEPENDENCE  
 
 
Part II 
Three Talks in New York City 
 
1  INNER REVOLUTION  
The need to change. A process in tim e or instantaneous? The conscious 
and the unconscious; dreams. The analy tical process. To see the content of 
consciousness without the separation of observer and observed. Noise and 
resistance. “When there is complete  cessation of division between the 
observer and the observed, then ‘what is’ is no longer what is.” 
QUESTIONS : Observer and observed; fragmentation; resistance. 
 
2  RELATIONSHIP  
Relationship. “You are the world.” The separate self; corruption. To see 
what actually “is”. What love is not.  “We have no passion; we have lust, 
we have pleasure.” To unde rstand what death is. Love is its own eternity. 
QUESTIONS : The concept of good and bad; sh aring; pain and fear; how to 
be free of the past? 
 
3  RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE . MEDITATION  
Is there a religious experience? Search  for truth; the meaning of search. 
“What is a religious mind?” “What is  the quality of mind which is no 
longer experiencing?” Discipline; virtue; order. Meditation is not an 
escape. The function of knowledge  and freedom from the known. 
“Meditation is to find out if there is a field not already contaminated by 
the known.” “The first st ep is the last step.” 
QUESTIONS : The analogy of dirt; awar eness; consciousness; love; 
psychological time. 
 
 
Part III 
Two Conversations: J. Kr ishnamurti and Alain Naudé 
 
1  THE CIRCUS OF MAN ’S STRUGGLE  
2  ON GOOD AND EVIL  
 INDIA  
 
Part IV 
Two Conversations: Krishnamurt i and Swami Venkatesananda 
 
1  The guru and search. Four schools of  Yoga scrutinized  (Karma, Bhakti, 
Raja, Gnana Yoga). 
2  Four “mahavakyas” from the Upanis hads discussed. Communication and 
the Bodhisattva ideal. Vedanta and the ending of knowledge. 
 
 
Part V 
Three Talks in Madras 
 
1  THE ART OF SEEING  
To see, not partially but totally . “The act of seeing is the only truth.” Of 
the vast mind only a fragment is us ed. The fragmentary influence of 
culture, tradition. “Living in a little corner of a distorted field.” “You  
cannot understand through a fragment.” Freedom from “the little corner”. 
The beauty of seeing. 
 
2  FREEDOM  
To share a free mind. “If we could come upon this, it is really a 
mysterious flower.” Why has man not go t this thing? Fear. “Living” is not 
living. Words taken for substance. Wa stage of energy. “The mature mind 
has no comparison ... no measure.” The validity of “the life that you lead 
every day ... without understanding it you will never understand love, 
beauty, or death”. Through negation, th at thing which alone  is the positive 
comes into being. 
 
3  THE SACRED  
Ploughing, never sowing. Ideation. Sensitivity lacking in daily life. 
Attention and intelligence. Disorder in ourselves and the world: our 
responsibility. The question of seeing . Images and direct contact. The 
sacred. “When you have that love you can put away all your sacred 
books.” 
 
 
Part VI 
Four Dialogues in Madras 
 
1  CONFLICT  
Images: are we aware that we see through images? Co ncepts; the gap 
between concepts and daily living; resulting conflict. “To get illumination 
you must be able to look.” “To live without conflict, but not to go to 
sleep.” 2  THE PURSUIT OF PLEASURE  
Self-interest and self-dedication. De mand for satisfaction. Levels of 
gratification. Has psychological gratif ication any meaning? “A whirlpool 
of mischief and misery inwardly.” Ag gression. Pursuit of pleasure. “There 
are no roots of heaven in pleasure—t here are only roots of indifference 
and pain.” Watching is  its own discipline. 
 
3  TIME, SPACE AND THE CENTRE  
The ideal, the concept, and “what is”. Need to understand  suffering: pain, 
loneliness, fear, envy. The ego-centre. The space and time of the centre. Is 
it possible not to have an ego-centre and yet live in this world? “We live 
within the prison of our own thinking.” To see the structure of the centre. 
To look withou t the centre. 
 
4  A FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION  
What is clear thinking in relation to daily living? Meeting the present with 
the past. How to live with memory  and technological knowledge and yet 
be free of the past? Double life: te mple, office. How to live without 
fragmentation?—to answer from a concept is further fragmentation. 
Silence before the immensity of a fu ndamental question. “Can you live so 
completely that there is only the active present now?” 
 
 
EUROPE  
 
Part VII 
Seven Talks in Saanen, Switzerland 
 
1  WHAT IS YOUR OVERRIDING INTEREST ? 
Passion and intensity needed. The inne r and outer: can they be divided? 
QUESTIONS : Pleasure and interest; God; children and education; many 
different interests; the meaning of dem onstrations; of love, truth and order. 
 
2  ORDER  
The mind only knows disorder. The state of “not-knowing”. The “self” is 
part of the culture, which is disorder. 
QUESTIONS : Is the mind capable of l ooking? Analysis; the guru: 
relationship with Krishnamur ti; can you look at yourself? 
 
3  CAN WE UNDERSTAND OURSELVES ? 
The problem of self-knowledge is the problem of looking. To look 
without fragmentation, without the “me”. Analysis, dreams and sleep. The problem of the “observer” and of time. “When you look at yourself 
without the eyes of time, who is there to look?” 
QUESTIONS : Are some images necessary? Is evaluation vitiated by our 
state of confusion? Conflict. 4  LONELINESS  
Preoccupation with oneself. Relationshi p. Action in relationship and daily 
life. Images isolate: the understandin g of image-building. “Self-concern is 
my major image.” Relationship without conflict means love. 
QUESTIONS : Can the self have unmotivated passion? Images; drugs and 
stimulants. 
 
5  THOUGHT AND THE IMMEASURABLE  
Can thought solve our pr oblems? The function of thought. The field of 
thought and its projections. Can the mind enter into th e immeasurable? 
What is the factor of illusion? Phys ical and mental fear and escapes. The 
mind that is constantly learning. 
QUESTIONS : Can one observe without judgment and evaluation? Is 
perception seeing something totally? Ca n words be used to  describe a non-
verbal state? 
 
6  THE ACTION OF WILL AND THE ENERGY NEEDED FOR RADICAL 
CHANGE  
Great energy needed; its wastage. Will is resistance. Will as assertion of 
the “me”. Is there action without choice, which is not motivated? “To look 
with eyes that are not conditioned.” Choiceless awareness of conditioning. 
To see and reject the falseness. What  love is not. To face the question of 
death. “The ending of energy as the ‘m e’ is the capacity to look at death.” 
Energy to look at th e unknown: supreme en ergy is intelligence. 
QUESTIONS : We understand intellectually , but can’t live it; is a man 
capable? How to listen? Are not fee lings and emotions the cause of 
violence? 
 
7  THOUGHT , INTELLIGENCE , AND THE IMMEASURABLE  
Different meanings of space. The sp ace we think and act from; the space 
that thought has built. How is one to have immeasurable space? “To carry 
our burden and yet to s eek freedom.” Thought which does not divide itself 
is moving in experiencing. The meaning of intelligence. Harmony: mind, 
heart and organism. “Thought is of time, intelligence is not of time.” 
Intelligence and the immeasurable. 
QUESTIONS : Hatha Yoga. Is there separati on of observer and observed in 
technological work? Awareness and sleep. 
 
 
Part VIII 
Five Dialogues in Saanen 
  
1  THE FRAGMENTATION OF CONSCIOUSNESS  
Are we aware that we look at lif e fragmentarily? The conditioning of 
consciousness. Do we really know its  content? Is there a division into 
conscious and unconscious? The obser ver is part of the content of consciousness. Is there any agent outsi de this conditioned content? “Tricks 
I play upon myself.” What is action?  Since the self is fragmented, “I” 
cannot see life as a totality. 
 
2  IS INTELLIGENCE AWAKE ? 
What is the relationship between in telligence and thought ? The limitations 
of conditioned thinking. No new movement  can take place if the “old 
brain” is constantly in operation. “I have been going South, thinking I was 
going North.” The perception of the limit ations of the old is the seed of 
intelligence. Is the “new” recogn izable? The different dimension  can only 
operate through intelligence. 
 
3  FEAR 
The link between pleasure and fear; th e role of thought. Thought cannot 
reduce the uncertain unkn own to terms of knowledge. Need to see the 
structure of fear. Psychologically, tomorrow may not exist. What does, “To live wholly in the present” imply? 
 
4  FEAR, TIME AND THE IMAGE  
Chronological and psychological time.  The dilemma of knowledge. The 
dilemma of thought and th e image. Can one find the root of fear? “The 
mind that can never be hurt.” 
 
5  INTELLIGENCE AND THE RELIGIOUS LIFE  
What is a religious life? Relations hip between meditation and the quiet 
mind. Thought as measure; the ac tion of measurement. How can the 
immeasurable be understood? Intellig ence as the relationship between the 
measurable and the immeasurable. The awakening of intelligence. 
Choiceless awareness. Learning , not accumulating knowledge. 
  
 
ENGLAND  
 
Part IX 
Two Talks at Brockwood 
 
1  THE RELATIONSHIP TO AWARENESS OF THOUGHT AND THE IMAGE  
The uses and limitations of thought. Images: the authority of the image. “The more sensitive one is, the greater the burden of im ages.” Analysis 
and images. Psychological order; cause s of disorder: opinion, comparison, 
images. Possible dissolution of imag es. Formation of images. Attention 
and inattention. “It is only when the mind is inattentive that the image is 
formed.” Attention and harmony: mind, heart, body. 
 2  THE MEDITATIVE MIND AND THE IMPOSSIBLE QUESTION  
“Meditation is the total release of  energy.” Western world built on 
measurement, which is maya  for the East. Schools of meditation useless. 
Energy depends on self-knowledge. Pr oblem of self-observation. To look 
“without the eyes of the past”. Nami ng. The hidden in oneself. Drugs. The 
hidden content and the impossible question. “Meditation is a way of 
putting aside altogether everything th at man has conceive d of himself and 
the world.” A radical revolution in one affects the whole world. What 
takes place when the mind is quiet? “Meditation is ... seeing the measure 
and going beyond the m easure.” Harmony and a “totally different life”. 
QUESTIONS : Intuition; awareness; awareness and sleep; teacher and 
disciple. 
 
 
Part X 
A Discussion with a sma ll group at Brockwood 
 
VIOLENCE AND THE “ME” 
Does change imply violence? To what  extent do we reject violence? 
Violence and energy: observing violence . What is the root of violence? 
Understanding the “me”; the “me” that wants to change is violent. Does 
the “me” or intelligence se e? The implications of seeing. 
 
 
Part XI 
Conversation: J. Krishnamur ti and Professor David Bohm 
 
ON INTELLIGENCE  
Thought is of the order of time; in telligence is of a different order, 
different quality. Is intelligence related to thought? Brain the instrument of intelligence; thought as a pointer. Thou ght, not intelligence, dominates the 
world. 
Problem of thought and the awaken ing of intelligence. Intelligence 
operating in a limited framework can serve highly unintelligent purposes. 
Matter, thought, intelligence have a co mmon source, are one energy; why 
did it divide? Security and surviv al: thought cannot consider death 
properly. 
“Can the mind keep the purity of th e original source?” Problem of the 
quietening of thought. Insight, the pe rception of the whole, is necessary. 
Communication without the interference of the conscious mind.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
AMERICA  
 
I 
 
Two Conversations: 
J. Krishnamurti and Prof essor Jacob Needleman 
 
 
1  The role of the teacher 
2  On inner space; on tradition and dependence 1 
 
 
THE ROLE OF THE TEACHER  
 
 
Conversation between J. Krishnamurti 
and Professor J. Needleman  
 
 
Needleman:1 There is much talk of a spiritual revolution among young people, 
particularly here in Califor nia. Do you see in this very mixed phenomenon any 
hope of a new flowering for modern ci vilization, a new possibility of growth? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : For a new possibility of growth, don’t you think, Sir, that one 
has to be rather serious, and not merely  jump from one spectacular amusement to 
another? If one has looked at all the religions of the world and seen their 
organized futility, and out of that perc eption seen something real and clear, 
perhaps then there could be something new in California, or in the world. But as 
far as I have seen, I am afraid there is not a quality of seri ousness in all this. I 
may be mistaken, because I see only these so-called young people  in the distance, 
among the audience, and occas ionally here; and by th eir questions, by their 
laughter, by their applause, they don’t strike me as being ve ry serious, mature, 
with great intent. I may be mistaken, naturally. 
 
Needleman:  I understand what you are saying. My question only is: perhaps we 
can’t very well expect you ng people to be serious. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is why I don’t think it is applicable to the young people. I 
don’t know why one has made such an ex traordinary thing out of young people, 
why it has become such an important thing. In a few years they will be the old people in their turn. 
 
Needleman:  As a phenomenon, apart from what is  underneath it all, this interest 
in transcending experience—or whatever one wants to call it—seems to be a kind 
of seed-ground from which certain unusua l people aside from all the phoneyness 
and all the deceivers, certain Ma sters perhaps, may spring up. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But I am not sure, Sir, that all the deceivers and exploiters are 
not covering this up. “Krishna-consciousn ess” and Transcendental Meditation 
and all this nonsense that is  going on—they are caught in all that. It is a form of 
exhibitionism, a form of amusement and entertainment. For something new to 
take place there must be a nucleus of really devoted, serious people, who go 
                                                 
1 Jacob Needleman is Professor of philosophy at San Francisco State College; author of The New 
Religions , and editor of the Penguin Metaphysical Library. through to the very end. After going throug h all these things, they say, “Here is 
something I am going to pursue to the end.” 
 
Needleman:  A serious person would be some one who would have to become 
disillusioned with everything else. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I would not call it disillusioned but a form of seriousness. 
 
Needleman:  But a precondition for it? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, I wouldn’t call it disillusionment at all, that leads to despair 
and cynicism. I mean the examination of  all the things that are so-called 
religious, so-called spiritual: to examine, to find out what  is the truth in all this, 
whether there is any truth in it. Or to discard the whole thing and start anew, and 
not go through all the trappi ngs, all the mess of it. 
 
Needleman:  I think that is what I tried to say,  but this expresses it better. People 
who have tried something and it has failed for them. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Not “other people”. I mean one has to discard all the promises, 
all the experiences, all the mystical asser tions. I think one has to start as though 
one knew absolutely nothing. 
 
Needleman:  That is very hard. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, Sir, I don’t think that is hard. I think it is hard only for those 
people who have filled themselves  with other people’s knowledge. 
 
Needleman:  Isn’t that most of us? I was spea king to my class yesterday at San 
Francisco State, and I said I was going  to interview Krishnamurti and what 
question would you like me to ask him.  They had many ques tions, but the one 
that touched me most was what one young man said: “I have read his books over 
and over again and I can’t do what he says.” There was something so clear about 
that, it rang a bell. It seems in a certain s ubtle sense to begin in this way. To be a 
beginner, fresh! 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I don’t think that we question enough. Do you know what I 
mean? 
 
Needleman:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We accept, we are gullible, we are greedy for new experiences. 
People swallow what is said by anybody with a beard, with promises, saying you 
will have a marvellous experience if you do  certain things! I think one has to say: 
“I know nothing.” Obviously I can’t rely  on others. If there were no books, no 
gurus, what would you do? Needleman:  But one is so easily deceived. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You are deceived when  you want something. 
 
Needleman:  Yes, I understand that. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So you say, “I am going to find  out, I am going to enquire step 
by step. I don’t want to deceive mysel f.” Deception arises when I want, when I 
am greedy, when I say, “All experi ence is shallow, I want something 
mysterious”—then I am caught. 
 
Needleman:  To me you are speaking about a state, an attitude, an approach, 
which is itself very far along in understand ing for a man. I feel  very far from that 
myself, and I know my students do. And so they feel, rightly or wrongly, a need 
for help. They probably misunderstand what help is, but is there such a thing as 
help? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Would you say: “Why do you ask for help?” 
 
Needleman:  Let me put it like this. You sort of  smell yourself deceiving yourself, 
you don’t exactly know... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is fairly simple. I don’t wa nt to deceive myself—right? So I 
find out what is the movement, what is th e thing that brings deception. Obviously 
it is when I am greedy, when I want something, when I am dissatisfied. So 
instead of attacking greed, want, dissatisfaction, I want something more. 
 
Needleman:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So I have to understand my greed. What am I greedy for? Is it 
because I am fed up with this world, I have had women,  I have had cars, I have 
had money and I want something more? 
 
Needleman:  I think one is greedy because one de sires stimulation, to be taken out 
of oneself, so that one doesn’t see the pove rty of oneself. But what I am trying to 
ask—I know you have answered  this question many times in your talks, but it 
keeps recurring, almost unavoidably—the great traditions of the world, aside 
from what has become of them (they have  become distorted and misinterpreted 
and deceptive) always speak di rectly or indirectly of he lp. They say “The guru is 
yourself too”, but at the same time there is help. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, you know what that word “guru” means? 
 
Needleman:  No, not exactly. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : The one who points. That is one  meaning. Another meaning is 
the one who brings enlightenment, lifts yo ur burden. But instead of lifting your 
burden they impose th eir burden on you. 
 
Needleman:  I am afraid so. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Guru also means one who helps you to cross over—and so on, 
there are various meanings. The moment the guru says he knows, then you may 
be sure he doesn’t know. Because what he knows is something past, obviously. 
Knowledge is the past. And when he says  he knows, he is thinking of some 
experience which he has had,  which he has been able to recognize as something 
great, and that recognition is born out of  his previous knowledge, otherwise he 
couldn’t recognize it, and therefore his experience has its roots in the past. 
Therefore it is not real. 
 
Needleman:  Well, I think that most knowledge is that. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So why do we want any form of  ancient or modern tradition in 
all this? Look, Sir, I don’t read any relig ious, philosophical, psychological books: 
one can go into oneself at tremendous de pths and find out everything. To go into 
oneself is the problem, how to do it. No t being able to do it one asks, “Would 
you please help me?” 
 
Needleman:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And the other fellow says, “I’ll help you” and pushes you off 
somewhere else. 
 
Needleman:  Well, it sort of answers the question. I was reading a book the other 
day which spoke of something called “Sat-san”. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do you know what it means? 
 
Needleman:  Association with the wise. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, with good people. 
 
Needleman : With good people, Ah! 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Being good you are wise. Not,  being wise you are good. 
 
Needleman:  I understand that. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Because you are good, you are wise. 
 Needleman:  I am not trying to pin this down to something, but I find my students 
and I myself, speaking for myself, when we  read, when we hear you, we say, 
“Ah! I need no one, I need to be with no one”—and there is a tremendous 
deception in this too. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Naturally, because you are being influenced by the speaker. 
 
Needleman:  Yes. That is true. ( Laughter. ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, look, let’s be very simple. Suppose, if there were no book, 
no guru, no teacher, what would you do? One is  in turmoil, confusion, agony, 
what would you do? With no body to help you, no dr ugs, no tranquillizers, no 
organized religions, what would you do? 
 
Needleman:  I can’t imagine what I would do. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s it. 
 
Needleman:  Perhaps there would be a moment of urgency there. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s it. We haven’t the ur gency because we say, “Well, 
somebody is going to help me.” 
 
Needleman:  But most people would be driv en insane by that situation. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am not sure, Sir. 
 
Needleman:  I’m not sure either. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, I am not at all sure. Because  what have we done up to now? 
The people on whom we have relied, the religions, the churches, education, they 
have led us to this awful mess. We aren ’t free of sorrow, we aren’t free of our 
beastliness, our uglin ess, our vanities. 
 
Needleman:  Can one say that of all of them ? There are differences. For every 
thousand deceivers there is one Buddha. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But that is not my concern, Sir, if we say that it leads to such 
deception. No, no. 
 
Needleman:  Then let me ask you th is. We know that withou t hard work the body 
may get ill, and this hard work is what we  call effort. Is there another effort for 
what we might call the spirit? You speak against effort, but does not the growth 
and well-being of all sides of man demand something like hard work of one sort 
or another? 
 KRISHNAMURTI : I wonder what you mean by hard work? Physical hard work? 
 
Needleman:  That is what we usually mean by hard work. Or going against 
desires. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You see, there we are! Our co nditioning, our culture, is built 
around this “going against”. Erecting a wall of resistance. So when we say “hard 
work”, what do we mean? Laziness? W hy have I to make an effort about 
anything? Why? 
 
Needleman:  Because I wish for something. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. Why is there this cult of effort? Why have I to make effort 
to reach God, enlightenment, truth? 
 
Needleman:  There are many possible answers, but I can only answ er for myself. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It may be just there, only I don’t know how to look. 
 
Needleman:  But then there must be an obstacle. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : How to look! It may be just round the comer, u nder the flower, 
it may be anywhere. So first I have to lear n to look, not make an  effort to look. I 
must find out what it means to look. 
 
Needleman:  Yes, but don’t you admit that th ere may be a resistance to that 
looking? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Then don’t bother to look! If somebody comes along and says, 
“I don’t want to look”, how are you going to force him to look? 
 
Needleman:  No. I am speaking about myself now. I want to look. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : If you want to look, what do you mean by looking? You must 
find out what it means to lo ok before you make an e ffort to look. Right, Sir? 
 
Needleman:  That would be, to me, an effort. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. 
 
Needleman:  To do it in that delicate, subtle wa y. I wish to look, but I don’t wish 
to find out what it means to look. I agree this is  much more to me the basic thing. 
But this wish to do it quickly, to  get it over, is this not resistance? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Quick medicine to get it over. 
 Needleman:  Is there something in me that I have  to study, that resists this subtle, 
much more delicate thing you  are speaking about? Is th is not work, what you are 
saying? Isn’t it work to ask the question so quie tly, so subtly? It seems to me it is 
work to not listen to that part that wants to do it... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Quickly. 
 
Needleman:  For us particularly in the West, or maybe for all men. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am afraid it is all over the wo rld the same. “Tell me how to get 
there quickly.” 
 
Needleman:  And yet you say it is in a moment. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is, obviously. 
 
Needleman:  Yes, I understand. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, what is effort? To get out of bed in the morning, when you 
don’t want to get up, is an effort. What brings on that lazine ss? Lack of sleep, 
overeating, overindulging an d all the rest of it; and ne xt morning you say, “Oh, 
what a bore, I have to get up!” Now wa it a minute, Sir, follow it. What is 
laziness? Is it physical laziness,  or is thought itself lazy? 
 
Needleman:  That I don’t understand. I need a nother word. “Thought is lazy?” I 
find that thought is always the same. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No Sir. I am lazy, I don’t want to get up and so I force myself to 
get up. In that is so-called effort. 
 
Needleman:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I want that, but I shouldn’t have it, I resist it. The resistance is 
effort. I get angry and I mustn’t be angry:  resistance, effort. What has made me 
lazy? 
 
Needleman:  The thought that I ought to be getting up. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s it. 
 
Needleman:  All right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So I really have to go into this whole que stion of thought. Not 
make out that the body is  lazy, force the body out of  bed, because the body has 
its own intelligence, it knows when it is tired and should  rest. This morning I was 
tired; I had prepared the mat and everyt hing to do yoga exercises and the body said “No, sorry”. And I said, “All right”.  That is not laziness. The body said, 
“Leave me alone because you talked ye sterday, you saw many people, you are 
tired.” Thought then says, “You must get up and do the exercises because it is 
good for you, you have done  it every day, it has become a habit, don’t relax, you 
will get lazy, keep at it.” Which means: thought is making me lazy, not the body 
is making me lazy. 
 
Needleman:  I understand that. So there is an effort with regard to thought. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So no effort! Why is thought so mechanical? And is all thought 
mechanical? 
 
Needleman:  Yes, all right, one puts that question. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Isn’t it? 
 
Needleman:  I can’t say that I have verified that. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But we can, Sir. That is fairly simple to see. Isn’t all thought 
mechanical? The non-mechanical state is the absence of tho ught; not the neglect 
of thought but the absence of it. 
 
Needleman:  How can I find that out? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do it now, it is simple enoug h. You can do it now if you wish 
to. Thought is  mechanical. 
 
Needleman:  Let’s assume that. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Not assume. Don’t assume anything. 
 
Needleman:  All right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Thought is mechanical, isn’t it?—because it is repetitive, 
conforming, comparing. 
 
Needleman:  That part I see, the comparing. But my experience is that not all 
thought is of the same quality. There are qualities of thought. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Are there? 
 
Needleman:  In my experience there are. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Let’s find out. What is thought, thinking? 
 Needleman:  There seems to be thought that is very shallow, very repetitive, very 
mechanical, it has a certain taste to it. Th ere seems to be another kind of thought 
which is connected more w ith my body, with  my whole self, it resonates in 
another way. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is what, Sir? Thought is the response of memory. 
 
Needleman:  All right, this is a definition. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, no, I can see it in myself. I have to go to that house this 
evening—the memory, the di stance, the design—all that  is memory, isn’t it? 
 
Needleman:  Yes, that is memory. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I have been there before and so  the memory is well established 
and from that there is either  instant thought, or thought  which takes a little time. 
So I am asking myself: is all thought similar, mechanical, or is there thought 
which is non-mechanical, which is non-verbal? 
 
Needleman:  Yes, that’s right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is there thought if there is no word? 
 
Needleman:  There is understanding. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait, Sir. How does this unde rstanding take place? Does it 
happen when thought is functioning rapidly, or when thought is quiet? 
 
Needleman:  When thought is quiet, yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Understanding is nothing to do with thought. You may reason, 
which is the process of thinking, logic, till you say, “I don’t understand it”; then 
you become silent, and you say, “A h! I see it, I understand it.” That 
understanding is not a result of thought. 
 
Needleman:  You speak of an energy which seem s to be uncaused. We experience 
the energy of cause and effect, which shap es our lives, but what is this other 
energy’s relationship to the energy we are familiar with? What is energy? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : First of all: is energy divisible? 
 
Needleman:  I don’t know. Go on. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It can be divided. Physical energy, the energy of anger and so 
on, cosmic energy, human energy, it can a ll be divided. But it is all one energy, 
isn’t it? Needleman:  Logically, I say yes. I don’t understand energy. Sometimes I 
experience the thing which I call energy. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Why do we divide energy at all, that is what I want to get at; 
then we can come to it differently. Se xual energy, physical energy, mental 
energy, psychological energy, cosmic ener gy, the energy of the businessman who 
goes to the office and so on—why do we di vide it? What is the reason for this 
division? 
 
Needleman:  There seem to be many parts of oneself which are separate; and we 
divide life, it seems to me, because of that. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Why? We have divided the wo rld into Communist, Socialist, 
Imperialist, and Catholic , Protestant, Hindu, Buddhist, and nationalities, 
linguistic divisions, the whole thing is fragmentation. Why has the mind 
fragmented the whole of life? 
 
Needleman:  I don’t know the answer. I see the ocean and I see a tree: there is a 
division. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. There is a difference betwee n the sea and the tree—I hope 
so! But that is not a division. 
 
Needleman:  No. It is a difference, not a division. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But we are asking why the divisi on exists, not only outwardly 
but in us. 
 
Needleman:  It is in us, that is th e most interesting question. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Because it is in us we extend it outwards. Now wh y is there this 
division in me? The “me” and the “not  me”. You follow? The higher and the 
lower, the Atman and the lowe r self. Why this division? 
 
Needleman:  Maybe it was done, at least in the beginning, to help men to question 
themselves. To make them question whethe r they really know  what they think 
they know. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Through division will they find out? 
 
Needleman:  Maybe through the idea that there is something that I don’t 
understand. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : In a human being there is a di vision—why? What is the “raison 
d’être”, what is the structure of this division? I see there is a thinker and 
thought—right? Needleman:  I don’t see that. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : There is a thinker who says, “I must control that thought, I must 
not think this, I must think th at”. So there is a thinker who says, “I must”, or “I 
must not”. 
 
Needleman:  Right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : There is the division. “I should be this”, and “I should not be 
that”. If I can understand why this division in me exis ts—Oh look, look! Look at 
those hills! Marvellous, isn’t it? 
 
Needleman:  Beautiful! 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now, Sir, do you look at it with a division? 
 
Needleman:  No. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Why not? 
 
Needleman:  There wasn’t the “me” to do anything with it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s all. You can’t do anything  about it. Here, with thought, I 
think I can do something. 
 
Needleman:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So I want to change “what is”.  I can’t change “what is” there, 
but I think I can change “what is” in me. Not knowing how to change it I have 
become desperate, lost, in despair. I say, “I can’t change”, and therefore I have 
no energy to change. 
 
Needleman:  That’s what one says. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So first, before I change “w hat is”, I must know who is the 
changer, who it is that changes. 
 
Needleman:  There are moments when one kn ows that, for a moment. Those 
moments are lost. There are moments wh en one knows who se es “what is” in 
oneself. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No Sir. Sorry. Just to see “what is” is enough, not to change it. 
 
Needleman:  I agree. I agree with that. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : I can see “what is” only when the observer is not. When you 
looked at those hills the observer was not. 
 
Needleman:  I agree, yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The observer only came into being when you wanted to change 
“what is”. You say: I don’t like “what is ”, it must be changed, so there is 
instantly a duality. Can the mind observe “w hat is” without the observer? It took 
place when you looked at those hills w ith that marvellous light on them. 
 
Needleman:  This truth is absolute truth. Th e moment one experiences it one says, 
“Yes!” But one’s experience is also that one forgets this. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Forget! 
 
Needleman:  By that I mean one continually tries to change it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Forget it, and pick it up again. 
 
Needleman:  But in this discussion—whatever you intend—there is help coming 
from this discussion. I know , as much as I know anyt hing, it could not happen 
without the help that is be tween us. I could look at those hills and maybe have 
this non-judging, but it wouldn’t be im portant to me; I wouldn’t know that that  is 
the way I must look for salvation. And this, I think, is a question one always 
wants to bring. Maybe this is the mind again wanting to grab  and hold on to 
something, but nevertheless it s eems that the human condition... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, we looked at those hills, you couldn’t change that, you just 
looked; and you l ooked inwardly an d the battle began. For a moment you looked 
without that battle, without that strife, and all the rest of it. Then you remembered 
the beauty of that moment, of that second,  and you wanted to capture that beauty 
again. Wait Sir! Proceed. So  what happens? It sets up another conflict: the thing 
you had and you would like to have again, and you don’t know how to get it 
again. You know, if you think about it, it is not the same, it is not that. So you 
strive, battle. “I must control, I mustn’ t want”—right? Whereas if you say, “All 
right, it is over, finished”, that moment is over. 
 
Needleman:  I have to learn that. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, no. 
 
Needleman:  I have to learn, don’t I? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What is there to learn? 
 
Needleman:  I have to learn the futility of this conflict. KRISHNAMURTI : No. What is there to learn? Yo u yourself see that that moment 
of beauty becomes a memory , then the memory says, “I t was so beautiful I must 
have it again.” You are not concerned w ith beauty, you are concerned with the 
pursuit of pleasure. Pleasure and beauty don’t go together. So if  you see that, it is 
finished. Like a dangerous snak e, you won’t go near it again. 
 
Needleman:  (Laughs ) Perhaps I haven’t seen it, so I can’t say. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is the question. 
 
Needleman:  Yes, I think that must be so, because one keeps going back again 
and again. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. This is the real thing. If I see the beauty of that light, and it 
is really extraordinarily be autiful, I just see it. Now with that same quality of 
attention I want to see myself. There is  a moment of perception which is as 
beautiful as that. Th en what happens? 
 
Needleman:  Then I wish for it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Then I want to capture it, I want to cultivate it, I want to pursue 
it. 
 
Needleman:  And how to see that? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Just to see that is taking place is enough. 
 
Needleman:  That’s what I forget! 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is not a question of forgetting. 
 
Needleman:  Well, that is what I don’t underst and deeply enough. That just the 
seeing is enough. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Look, Sir. When you see a snake what takes place? 
 
Needleman:  I am afraid. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. What takes place? You run,  kill it, do something. Why? 
Because you know it is dangerous. You are aware of the danger of it. A cliff, 
better take a cliff, an abyss. You know the danger of it. Nobody has to tell you. 
You see directly what would happen. 
 
Needleman:  Right. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Now, if you see directly that the beauty of that moment of 
perception cannot be repeated, it is over. Bu t thought says, “No,  it’s not over, the 
memory of it remains.” So what are you doing now? You are pursuing the dead 
memory of it, not the living beauty of it— right? Now if you see that, the truth of 
it—not the verbal statement, th e truth of it—it is finished. 
 
Needleman:  Then this seeing is much  rarer than we think. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : If I see the beauty of that minute, it is over. I don’t want to 
pursue it. If I pursue it, it becomes a pleasure. Then if I can’t get it, it brings 
despair, pain and all the rest of it. So I say, “All right, finished.” Then what takes 
place? 
 
Needleman:  From my experience, I’m afraid th at what takes place is that the 
monster is born again. It  has a thousand lives. (Laughter. ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No Sir. When did that beauty take place? 
 
Needleman:  The place when I saw without trying to change. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : When the mind was completely quiet. 
 
Needleman:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wasn’t it? Right? 
 
Needleman:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : When you looked at that, your mind was quiet, it didn’t say, “I 
wish I could change it, copy it and phot ograph it, this, that, and the other”—you 
just looked. The mind wasn’t in operation. Or rathe r, thought wasn’t in operation. 
But thought comes immediately into operation. Now one has asked, “How can 
thought be quiet? How ca n one exercise thought when necessary, and not 
exercise it when it is not necessary?” 
 
Needleman:  Yes, that question is inte nsely interesting to me, Sir. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is, why do we worship thought? Why has thought become 
so extraordinarily important? 
 
Needleman:  It seems able to satisfy our desi res; through thought we believe we 
can satisfy. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, not from satisfaction. Why has thought in all cultures with 
most people become of such vital concern? 
 Needleman:  One usually identifies oneself as thought, as one’s thoughts. If I 
think about myself I think a bout what I think, what kind  of ideas I have, what I 
believe. Is this what you mean? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Not quite. Apart from identificati on with the “me”, or with “not 
me”, why is thought always active? 
 
Needleman:  Ah, I see. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Thought is always operating in  knowledge, isn’t it? If there was 
no knowledge, thought would no t be. Thought is always op erating in the field of 
the known. Whether me chanical, non-verbal and so on, it is always working in 
the past. So my life is the past, because  it is based on pa st knowledge, past 
experience, past memories, pleasure, pain, fear and so on—it is all the past. And 
the future I project from the past, though t projects from the past. So thought is 
fluctuating between the past and the future . All the time it says, “I should do this, 
I should not do that, I should have behaved.” Why is it doing all this? 
 
Needleman:  I don’t know. Habit? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Habit. All right. Go on. Let’s find out. Habit? 
 
Needleman:  Habit brings what I call pleasure. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Habit, pleasure, pain. 
 
Needleman:  To protect me. Pain, yes pain. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is always working within that field. Why? 
 
Needleman:  Because it doesn’t know any better. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. No. Can thought work in any other field? 
 
Needleman:  That sort of thought, no. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, not any thought. Can thought work in any other field except 
in the field of the known? 
 
Needleman:  No. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Obviously not. It can’t work in something I don’t know; it can 
only work in this field. No w why does it work in this? Th ere it is, Sir—why? It is 
the only thing I know. In that there is secu rity, there is protection, there is safety. 
That is all I know. So th ought can only function in the field of the known. And 
when it gets tired of that, as it does, then  it seeks something outs ide. Then what it seeks is still the known. It s gods, its visions, its spiritu al states—all projected out 
of the known past into the fu ture known. So thought alwa ys works in this field. 
 
Needleman:  Yes, I see. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Therefore thought is always wo rking in a prison. It can call it 
freedom, it can call it beauty, it can call it  what it likes! But it is always within 
the limitations of the barbed  wire fence. Now I want to find out whether thought 
has any place except in ther e. Thought has no place wh en I say, “I don’t know.” 
“I really don’t know.” Right? 
 
Needleman:  For the moment. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I really don’t know. I only know this, a nd I really don’t know 
whether thought can function in any field at all, excep t this. I really don’t know. 
When I say, “I don’t know”, which doesn’t mean I am expectin g to know, when I 
say I really don’t know—what happens? I climb down the ladder. I become, the 
mind becomes, completely humble. 
Now that state of “not knowing” is intelligence. Then it can operate in the 
field of the known and be free to wo rk somewhere else if it wants to. 
 
MALIBU , CALIFORNIA  
26 MARCH 1971 2 
 
 
ON INNER SPACE; ON TRADITION  
AND DEPENDENCE  
 
 
Conversation between J. Krishnamurti 
and Professor J. Needleman  
 
 
Needleman:  In your talks you have given a fresh meaning to the necessity for 
man to become his own authority. Yet cannot  this assertion easily be turned into 
a form of humanistic psychology without reference to the sacred, transcendent 
dimension of human life on earth in the mi dst of a vast intelligent Cosmos? Must 
we not only try to see ourselves in the moment, but also as creatures of the 
Cosmos? What I am trying to ask about is  this question of cosmic dimension. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : As soon as we use that wo rd “dimension”, it implies space, 
otherwise there is no dimension, there is  no space. Are we talking about space, 
outward space, endless space? 
 
Needleman:  No. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Or the dimension of space in us? 
 
Needleman:  It would have to be the latter, but not totally with out the former, I 
think. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is there a difference between the outer space, which is limitless, 
and the space in us? Or is th ere no space in us at all and we only k now the outer 
space? We know the spa ce in us as a centre and circ umference. The dimension of 
that centre, and the radius from that centre , is what we genera lly call that space. 
 
Needleman:  Inner space, yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, inner space. Now if there is a centre, the space must 
always be limited and therefore we divide the inner space from the outer space. 
 
Needleman:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We only know this very limited space but we think we would 
like to reach the other space, have immens e space. This house exists in space, 
otherwise there could be no house, and th e four walls of this room make its 
space. And the space in me is  the space which the centre  has created round itself. 
Like that microphone... Needleman:  Yes, centre of interest. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Not only centre of interest, it ha s its own space, otherwise it 
couldn’t exist. 
 
Needleman:  Yes, right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : In the same way, human beings may have a centre and from that 
centre they create a space, the centre creates a space round itself. And that space 
is always limited, it must be; because of the centre, the space is limited. 
 
Needleman:  It is defined, it is a defined space, yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : When you use the wo rds “cosmic space”... 
 
Needleman:  I didn’t use the words “cosmic sp ace”; I said cosmic, the dimension 
of the Cosmos. I wasn’t asking about outer space and trips to the planets. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So we are talking of the space which the centre creates round 
itself, and also a space between two though ts; there is a spa ce, an interval 
between two thoughts. 
 
Needleman:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And the centre having created that space round itself, there is 
the space outside the limit. There is a sp ace between thinking, between thoughts; 
and also a space round the centre itself,  and the space beyond the barbed wire. 
Now what is the question, Sir? How to  expand space? How to enter a different 
dimension of space? 
 
Needleman:  Not how to but... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : ...not how to. Is there a different  dimension of space except the 
space round the centre? 
 
Needleman:  Or a different dimension of reality? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Space, we are talking about that  for the moment, we can use that 
word. First I must see very clearly the space between two thoughts. 
 
Needleman:  The interval. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : This interval between two thou ghts. Interval means space. And 
what takes place in this interval? 
 Needleman:  Well, I confess I don’t know beca use my thoughts overlap all the 
time. I know there are intervals, there ar e moments when this interval appears, 
and I see it, and there is freedom there for a moment. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Let’s go into this a bit, shall we? There is space between two 
thoughts. And there is spac e which the centre creates round itself, which is the 
space of isolation. 
 
Needleman:  All right, yes. That is a cold word. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is cutting itself off. I consid er myself important, with my 
ambition, with my frustrations, with my  anger, with my sexuality, my growth, 
my meditation, my reaching Nirvana. 
 
Needleman:  Yes, that is isolation. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is isolation. My relation with you is the image of that 
isolation, which is that space. Then ha ving created that space there is space 
outside the barbed wire. Now is there a space of a totally different dimension? 
That is the question. 
 
Needleman:  Yes, that embraces the question. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : How shall we find out if the space round me, round the centre, 
exists? And how can I find out the other?  I can speculate about the other, I can 
invent any space I like—but that is too abstract, too silly! 
 
Needleman:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So is it possible to be free of the centre, so that the centre 
doesn’t create space round itself, build a wall round itself, isolation, a prison—
and call that space? Can that centre cease to  be? Otherwise I can ’t go beyond it; 
the mind cannot go beyo nd that limitation. 
 
Needleman:  Yes, I see what you mean. It’s logical, reasonable. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is, what is that centre? Th at centre is the “me” and “non-
me”, that centre is the observer, the thi nker, the experiencer, and in that centre is 
also the observed. The centre says, “That is  the barbed wire I have created round 
myself.” 
 
Needleman:  So that centre is limited there too. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. Therefore it separates itself from the barbed wire fence. So 
that becomes the observed. The centre is  the observer. So there is space between 
the observer and the observed—right Sir? Needleman:  Yes, I see that. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And that space it tries to bridge  over. That is what we are doing. 
 
Needleman:  It tries to bridge it over. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It says, “This must be changed, that must not be, this is narrow, 
that is wide, I must be better than that.”  All that is the movement in the space 
between the observer and the observed. 
 
Needleman:  I follow that, yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And hence there is conflict between the observer and the 
observed. Because the observe d is the barbed wire which must be jumped over, 
and so the battle begins. No w can the observer—who is  the centre, who is the 
thinker, who is the knower, who is ex perience, who is knowledge—can that 
centre be still? 
 
Needleman:  Why should it wish to? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : If it is not still, the space is always limited. 
 
Needleman:  But the centre, the obse rver, doesn’t know that it is limited in this 
way. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But you can see it, look. The cent re is the observer, let’s call 
him the observer for the moment—the th inker, the experiencer, the knower, the 
struggler, the searcher, the one who says , “I know, and you don’t know.” Right? 
Where there is a centre it must  have a space round itself. 
 
Needleman:  Yes, I follow. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And when it observes, it observe s through that space. When I 
observe those mountains there is spa ce between me and the mountains. And 
when I observe myself there is space between me and the thing I observe in 
myself. When I observe my wife, I observe her from the centre of my image 
about her, and she observes me with the image which sh e has about me. So there 
is always this division and space. 
 
Needleman:  Changing the approach to the subj ect entirely, there is something 
called the sacred. Sacred teachings, sacred  ideas, the sacred, which for a moment 
seems to show me that this centre and this space you speak about is an illusion. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait. One has learnt this fro m somebody else. Are we going to 
find out what is the sacred , then? Are we looking beca use somebody has told me, “That is sacred”, or that there is a sacred  thing? Or is it my imagination, because 
I want something holy? 
 
Needleman:  Very often it is that but there is... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now which is it? The desi re for something holy? The 
imposition on my mind by others who have  said, “This is sacred?” Or my own 
desire, because everything is unholy and I want something holy , sacred? All this 
springs from the centre. 
 
Needleman:  Yes. Nevertheless... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait. We will find this out, what  is sacred. But I don’t want to 
accept tradition, or what somebody has said  about the sacred. Sir, I don’t know if 
you have experimented? Some years ago, fo r fun, I took a piece of rock from the 
garden and put it on the mantelpiece and pl ayed with it, brou ght flowers to it 
every day. At the end of a m onth it became terribly sacred! 
 
Needleman:  I know what you mean. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I don’t want that kind  of phoney sacredness. 
 
Needleman:  It’s a fetish. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sacredness is a fetish. 
 
Needleman:  Granted. Most of it is. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So I won’t accept anything that anybody says about what is 
sacred. Tradition! As a Brahmin one was brought up in a tradition which would 
beat anybody’s tradition, I assure you! 
What I am saying is: I want  to find out what is holy,  not man-made holiness. I 
can only find out wh en the mind has immense spac e. And it cannot have that 
immense space if there is a centre. When the centre is not in operation, then there 
is vast space. In that space, which is pa rt of meditation, there is something really 
sacred, not invented by my foolish little centre. There is  something immeasurably 
sacred, which you can never find out if there is a centre. A nd to imagine that 
sacredness is folly—you follow what I mean? 
Can the mind be free of this centre —with its terribly limited yardage of 
space—which can be measured  and expanded and contracted and all the rest of 
it? Can it? Man has said it can’t, and th erefore God has become another centre. 
So my real concern is this: whether the centre can be completely empty? That 
centre is consciousness. That centre is th e content of consciousness, the content 
is consciousness; there is no consciousness if there is no content. You must work 
this out... 
 Needleman:  Certainly what we ordinarily mean by it, yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : There is no house if there are no walls and no roof. The content 
is consciousness but we like to separate  them, theorize about it, measure the 
yardage of our consciousness. Whereas the centre is consciousness, the content 
of consciousness, and the content is cons ciousness. Without the content, where is 
consciousness? And that is the space. 
 
Needleman:  I follow a little bit of what you say.  I find myself wanting to say: 
well, what do you value here? What  is the important thing here? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I’ll put that question after I ha ve found out whether the mind 
can be empty of the content. 
 
Needleman:  All right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Then there is something else  that will operate, which will 
function within the field of  the known. But without fi nding that merely to say... 
 
Needleman:  No, no, this is so. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Let’s proceed. Space is betw een two thoughts, between two 
factors of time, two periods of time, because thought is time. Yes? 
 
Needleman:  All right, yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You can have a dozen periods of time but it is still thought, 
there is that space. Then th ere is the space round the centre, and the space beyond 
the self, beyond the barb ed wire, beyond the wall of the centre. The space 
between the observer and the observed is  the space which tho ught has created as 
the image of my wife and the image wh ich she has about me. You follow, Sir? 
 
Needleman:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : All that is manufactured by the centre. To speculate about what 
is beyond all that has no meaning to  me personally, it’s the philosopher’s 
amusement. 
 
Needleman:  The philosopher’s amusement... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am not interested. 
 
Needleman:  I agree. I am not interested sometimes, at my better moments, but 
nevertheless... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am sorry, because you are a philosopher! Needleman:  No, no, why should you remember that, please. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So my question is: “C an the centre be still,  or can the centre 
fade away?” Because if it doesn’t fade away, or lie very quiet, then the content of 
consciousness is going to create space within consciousness and call it the vast 
space. In that there lies deception and I do n’t want to deceive myself. I don’t say 
I am not brown when I am brown. So ca n that centre be abso rbed? Which means, 
can there be no image, because it is the image that separates? 
 
Needleman:  Yes, that is the space. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That image talks about love, but  the love of the image is not 
love. Therefore I must find out whether th e centre can be completely absorbed, 
dissolved, or lie as a vagu e fragment in the distance. If there is no possibility of 
that, then I must accept prison. 
 
Needleman:  I agree. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I must accept there is no freedom. Then I can decorate my 
prison for ever. 
 
Needleman:  But now this possib ility that you are spea king about, without 
searching for it consciously... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, don’t search for it! 
 
Needleman:  I say, without searching for it consciously, life or something 
suddenly shows me  it is possible. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is there! Life hasn’t shown me. It has shown me, when I look 
at that mountain, that there is an image in me; when I lo ok at my wife I see that 
there is an image in me. That is a fact. It  isn’t that I have to wait for ten years to 
find out about the image! I know it is there,  therefore I say: “Is it possible to look 
without the image?” Th e image is the centre, the obs erver, the thinker and all the 
rest of it. 
 
Needleman:  I am beginning to see the answer to my question. I begin to see—I 
am speaking to myself—I am beginning to see that there is no distinction 
between humanism and sacred teachings. There is just truth, or non-truth. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s all. False and true. 
 
Needleman:  So much for that. ( Laughter) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We are asking: “Can the co nsciousness empty itself of its 
content?” Not somebody else do it. Needleman:  That is the question, yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Not divine grace, the super-self,  some fictitious outside agency. 
Can the consciousness empty itself of all this  content? First see the beauty of it, 
Sir. 
 
Needleman:  I see it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Because it must empty itself w ithout an effort . The moment 
there is an effort, there is the observer who is making the effort to change the 
content, which is part of consciou sness. I don’t know if you see that? 
 
Needleman:  I follow. This emptying has to  be effortless, instantaneous. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It must be without an agent wh o is operating on it, whether an 
outside agent, or an inne r agent. Now can this be done without any effort, any 
directive—which says, “I will change the content”? This means the emptying of 
consciousness of all will, “to be” or “n ot to be”. Sir, look what takes place. 
 
Needleman:  I am watching. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I have put that question to my self. Nobody has put it to me. 
Because it is a problem of life, a problem of existence in this world. It is a 
problem which my mind has to solve. Ca n the mind, with all its content, empty 
itself and yet remain mi nd—not just float about? 
 
Needleman:  It is not suicide. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. 
 
Needleman:  There is some kind of subtle... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, Sir, that is too immature . I have put the question. My 
answer is: I really don’t know. 
 
Needleman:  That is the truth. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I really don’t know. But I am goi ng to find out, in the sense of 
not waiting to find out. The content of my consciousness is my unhappiness, my 
misery, my struggles, my sorrows, the images which I have collected through 
life, my gods, the frustrations, the pleasure s, the fears, the agonies, the hatreds—
that is my consciousness. Can all that be completely emptie d? Not only at the 
superficial level but right through?—t he so-called unconscious. If it is not 
possible, then I must live a life of misery, I must live in endless, unending sorrow. There is neither hope, nor despai r, I am in prison. So the mind must find 
out how to empty itself of a ll the content of itself, and yet live in this world, not become a moron, but have a brain that fu nctions efficiently. Now how is this to 
be done? Can it ever be done? Or is there no escape for man? 
 
Needleman:  I follow. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Because I don’t see how to get be yond this I invent all the gods, 
temples, philosophies, rituals—you understand? 
 
Needleman:  I understand. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : This is meditation, real meditation, not all the phoney stuff. To 
see whether the mind—with the brain which has evolved through time, which is 
the result of thousands of experiences, th e brain that functions efficiently only in 
complete security—whether the mind can empty itself a nd yet have a brain that 
functions as a marvellous machine. Also, it sees love is not pl easure; love is not 
desire. When there is love there is no image; but I don’t know wh at that love is. I 
only want love as pleasure, sex and all the rest of it. There must be a relationship 
between the emptying of consciousness and the thing called love; between the 
unknown and the known, which is the content of consciousness. 
 
Needleman:  I am following you. There mu st be this relationship. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The two must be in harmony. Th e emptying and love must be in 
harmony. And it may be only love th at is necessary and nothing else. 
 
Needleman:  This emptying is another word for love, is that what you are saying? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am only asking what is love . Is love within the field of 
consciousness? 
 
Needleman:  No, it couldn’t be. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Don’t stipulate. Don’t ever say ye s or no; find out! Love within 
the content of consciousness is pleasure , ambition and all that. Then what is 
love? I really don’t know. I won’t pret end any more about anything. I don’t 
know. There is some factor  in this which I must find out. Whether the emptying 
of consciousness with its content is love, which is the unknown? What is the 
relationship between the unknown and the known?—not the mysterious unknown, God or whatever name you give it. We will  come to God if we go 
through this. The relationship between the unknown, which I don’t know, which 
may be called love, and the content of consciousness, which I know, (it may be 
unconscious, but I can open it up and find  out)—what is the relationship between 
the known and the unknown? To move be tween the known an d the unknown is 
harmony, is intelligence, isn’t it? 
 
Needleman:  Absolutely. KRISHNAMURTI : So I must find out, the mind must find out, how to empty its 
content. That is, have no image, ther efore no observer. The image means the 
past, or the image which is taking place  now, or the image which I shall project 
into the future. So no image—no formula, idea, ideal, principle—all that implies 
image. Can there be no formation of image at all? You hurt me or you give me 
pleasure and therefore I have an image of  you. So no image formation when you 
hurt me or give me pleasure. 
 
Needleman:  Is it possible? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course it is. Otherwise I am doomed. 
 
Needleman:  You are doomed. In other words I am doomed. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We are doomed. Is it possible when you insult me to be 
completely watchful, attentive, so that it doesn’t leave a mark? 
 
Needleman:  I know what you mean. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : When you flatter me—no mark. Then there is no image. So I 
have done it, the mind has done it: which is , no formation of image at all. If you 
don’t form an image now, the pa st images have no place. 
 
Needleman:  I don’t follow that. “If I don’t form an image now...?” 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The past images have no place.  If you form an image, then you 
are related to it. 
 
Needleman:  You are connected to the past images. That is right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But if you don’t form any? 
 
Needleman:  Then you are free from the past. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : See it! See it! 
 
Needleman:  Very clear. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So the mind can empty itself of images by not forming an image 
now. If I form an image now, then I relate it with past images . So consciousness, 
the mind, can empty itself of all the im ages by not forming an image now. Then 
there is space, not space round the centre . And if one delves, goes into it much 
further, then there is some thing sacred, not invented  by thought, which has 
nothing to do with any religion. 
 
Needleman:  Thank you. * * * 
Needleman:  I have another question which I wanted to ask you. We see the 
stupidity of so many traditions which peop le hallow today, but aren’t there some 
traditions transmitted from generation to generation which are valuable and 
necessary, and without which we would lose the little humanity that we now 
have? Aren’t there traditions that are ba sed on something real, which are handed 
down? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Handed down... 
 
Needleman:  Ways of living, even if only in an external sense. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : If I hadn’t been taught from child hood not to run in front of a 
car... 
 
Needleman:  That would be the simplest example. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Or to be careful of fire, be careful of irrita ting the dog which 
might bite you, and so on.  That is also tradition. 
 
Needleman:  Yes, that certainly is. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The other kind of tradition is that you must love. 
 
Needleman:  That is the other extreme. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And the tradition of the weavers in India and other places. You 
know, they can weav e without a pattern and yet th ey weave in a tradition which 
is so deeply rooted that th ey don’t even have to think about it. It comes out with 
their hands. I don’t know if you have ev er seen it? In India they have a 
tremendous tradition and they produce marv ellous things. Also there is the 
tradition of the scientist, the biologist, the anthropologist, wh ich is tradition as 
the accumulation of knowledge, handed over by one scientis t to another scientist, 
by a doctor to another doctor, learning. Obviously that kind of tradition is 
essential. I wouldn’t call that tradition, would you? 
 
Needleman:  No, that is not what I had in mind. What I meant by tradition was a 
way of living. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I wouldn’t call that tradition. Don’t we mean by tradition some 
other factor? Is goodness a factor of tradition? 
 
Needleman:  No, but perhaps there are good traditions. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Good traditions, conditioned by th e culture in which one lives. 
Good tradition among the Brahmins used to be not to kill any human being or animal. They accepted that and functioned. We are saying: “Is goodness 
traditional? Can goodness function, blossom in tradition?” 
 
Needleman:  What I am asking then is: are th ere traditions which are formed by 
an intelligence either single, or collec tive, which understands human nature? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is intelligence traditional? 
 
Needleman:  No. But can intelligence form, or shape a way of living which can 
help other men more readily  to find themselves? I k now that this is a self-
initiated thing that you speak of, but are there no t men of great intelligence who 
can shape the external  conditions for me, so that I will not have quite as difficult 
a time to come to what you have seen? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That means what, Sir? You say you know. 
 
Needleman:  I don’t say I know. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am taking that. Suppose yo u are the great person of 
tremendous intelligence and you say, “My dear son, live this way.” 
 
Needleman:  Well I don’t have to say it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You exude your atmosphere, your aura, and then I say, “I’ll try 
it—he has got it, I haven’t got it.” Ca n goodness flower in your ambience? Can 
goodness grow under your shadow? 
 
Needleman:  No, but then I wouldn’t be intellig ent if I made those my conditions. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Therefore you are stating th at goodness cannot operate, 
function, flower in any environment. 
 
Needleman:  No, I didn’t say that. I was asking , are there environments which can 
be conducive to liberation? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We will go into this. A man who goes to a factory every day, 
day after day, and finds release in  drink and all the rest of it... 
 
Needleman:  This is the example of a poor environment, a bad tradition. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So what does the man who is in telligent, who is concerned with 
changing the environment, do for that man? 
 
Needleman:  Perhaps he is changing the en vironment for himself. But he 
understands something about man in gene ral. I am talking now about a great 
teacher, whatever that is. He helps, he pr esents a way of life to us which we don’t understand, which we haven’t verified  ourselves, but which somehow acts on 
something in us to bring us a little together. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is satsun, which is the company of th e good. It is nice to be 
in the company of the good because we won’t then quarrel, we  won’t fight each 
other, we won’t be violent; it is good. 
 
Needleman:  All right. But maybe the company of the good means that I will 
quarrel, but I’ll see it more, I’ll su ffer it more, I’ll understand it better. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So you want the company of the good in order to see yourself 
more clearly? 
 
Needleman:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Which means you depend on the environment to see yourself. 
 
Needleman:  Well perhaps in the beginning. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The beginning is the first step and the last step. 
 
Needleman:  I don’t agree. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Let’s go into it a little bit. S ee what has happened. I go with 
good men because in that ambience, in that atmos phere I see myself more 
clearly, because they are good I see my idiocies. 
 
Needleman:  Sometimes it happens that way. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am taking this. 
 
Needleman:  That is one example, right? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Or I am also good, therefore I live with them. Then I don’t need 
them. 
 
Needleman:  No we don’t need them then. All right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : If I am good I don’t need them. But if when I am not good and 
come into their presence, then I can see myself clea rly. Then to see myself 
clearly I must have them. This is what generally takes place. They become 
important, not my goodness. This happens every day. 
 
Needleman:  But is there not such a thing as  weaning the baby by blackening the 
breast? It happens that I do need th ese men, maybe in the beginning. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : I am going to question it, I want to find out. First of all, if I am 
good I don’t need them. I am like those hills and bi rds which have no need. 
 
Needleman:  Right. We can rule that out. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : When I am not good  I need their company, because in their 
company I see myself clearly; I feel a breath of freshness. 
 
Needleman:  Or how bad I am. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The moment I have a horror of myself, in the largest sense of 
the word, I am merely comp aring myself with them. 
 
Needleman:  No, not always. I can expose the im age I have of myself as a lie. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now I am questioning whethe r you need them to expose 
yourself as a liar. 
 
Needleman:  In principle, no. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, not in principle. Eith er it is so, or it is not. 
 
Needleman:  That is the question. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Which means if I need  them, then I am lost . Then I w ill for ever 
hang on to them. Sir, th is has happened since human relationships began. 
 
Needleman:  Yes it has. But it also happens that I hang on for a while and then I 
right it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Therefore why don’t you, the goo d man, tell me: “Look, begin, 
you don’t need me. You can watch yourself now clearly.” 
 
Needleman:  Maybe if I told you that, you wo uld take it utte rly wrongly and 
misunderstand me completely! 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Then what shall I do? Go on ha nging onto you, run after you? 
 
Needleman:  Not what shall you do, but what do you do? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What they generally do is run after him. 
 
Needleman:  They generally do, yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And hold on to his skirts. 
 Needleman:  But that is perhaps because the teacher is not intelligent. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. He says, “Look, I can’t teach you my friend, I have nothing 
to teach. If I am really good I have nothing to teach. I can only show.” 
 
Needleman:  But he doesn’t say it, he does it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I say, “Look I don’t want to  teach you, you can learn from 
yourself.” 
 
Needleman:  Yes, all right. Suppose he says that. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, he says learn from your self. Don’t depend. That means 
you, being good, are helping me to look at myself. 
 
Needleman:  Attracting you. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. You are putting me in a co rner so that I can’t escape. 
 
Needleman:  I see what you are saying. But it is  the easiest thing in the world to 
escape. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I don’t want to. Sir, you tell me, “Don’t depend, for goodness 
has no dependency.” If you want to be good you cannot depend on anything. 
 
Needleman:  Anything external, yes all right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : On anything, external or inward . Don’t depend on anything. It 
doesn’t mean just don’t depend on the postman, it means inwardly don’t depend. 
 
Needleman:  Right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That means what? I depend. He has told me one thing: “Don’t 
depend on me or on anybody, wife, husband, daughter, politician, don’t depend.” 
That’s all. He goes away. He leav es me with that. What shall I do? 
 
Needleman:  Find out if he is right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But I do depend. 
 
Needleman:  That’s what I mean. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I do depend on my wife, on th e priest, on some psychoanalyst—
I do depend. Then I begin. Because he tells  me the truth—you follow, Sir? It is 
there, I have to work it out. So I have to find out if it is the truth, or if it is a 
falsehood. Which means I must exercise my reason, my capacity, my intelligence. I must work. I can’t just say, “Well he has gone”. I depend on my 
cook! So I have to find out, I have to se e the truth and the false. I have seen it. 
That doesn’t depend on anybody. 
 
Needleman:  Right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Even the company of the good doesn’t teach me what is good 
and what is false, or true. I have to see it. 
 
Needleman:  Absolutely. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So I don’t depend on anybody to find what is true and what is 
false. 
 
MALIBU , CALIFORNIA  
26 MARCH 1971  
 
 
 
 
 
 
AMERICA  
 
II 
 
Three Talks in New York City 
 
 
1  Inner revolution 
2  Relationship 
3  Religious experience. Meditation 1 
 
 
INNER REVOLUTION  
 
 
The need to change. A process in time or instantaneous? The 
conscious and the unconscious; dreams. The analytical process. To 
see the content of consciousness without the separation of observer and observed. Noise and resistance. “When there is complete 
cessation of division between the observer and the observed, then 
‘what is’ is no longer what is.” 
Questions: Observer and observed; fragmentation; resistance. 
 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We are going to examine toge ther the question of what is 
hidden in the consciousness,  in the deeper layers of the mind—which is generally 
called the unconscious. We are concer ned with bringing about a radical 
revolution in ourselves and so in soci ety. The physical revolution which is 
advocated all over the world at the present time does not bring about a 
fundamental change in man. 
In a corrupt society, such as this, in Europe, India and elsewhere, there must 
be fundamental changes in the very structure of society. And if man remains 
corrupt in himself, in his activity, he will overcome whatever the structure be, 
however perfect; therefore it is imperative,  absolutely essential that he change. 
Is this change to be brought about through the process of time, through 
gradual achievement, through gradual cha nge? Or does the change take place 
only in the instant? That is what we are going to examine together. 
One sees that there must be change in  oneself—the more sensitive, the more 
alert and intelligent one is, the more one is aware that  there must be a deep, 
abiding, living change. The content of consciousness is consciousness—the two are not separate. What is implanted in  consciousness makes up consciousness. 
And to bring about a change in consci ousness—both in the obvious and in the 
hidden—does it depend on analysis, on tim e, on environmental pressure? Or is 
the change to take place totally independent of any pressure, of any compulsion? 
You know, this question is going to be ra ther difficult to go into, because it is 
quite complex and I hope we shall be able  to share what is being said. Unless one 
goes into this matter very seriously, really taking trouble, with deep interest, with passion, I am afraid one will not be able to  go very far; far in the sense not of 
time or space, but very deeply within oneself. One needs a great deal of passion, great energy and most of us waste our energies in conflict. And when we are 
examining this whole business of existenc e, we need energy. Energy comes with 
the possibility of change; if there is no possibility of change, th en energy wastes 
away. We think we cannot possibly change. We accept things as they are and 
thereby become rather dispirited, de pressed, uncertain and confused. It is 
possible to change radically and that is  what we are going to examine. If you 
will—do not follow exactly wh at the speaker is saying, but use his words as a 
mirror to observe yourself and enquire with passion, w ith interest, with vitality 
and a great deal of energy. Then perhaps we can come to a point where it will be 
obvious that without any ki nd of effort, without any kind of motive, the radical 
change takes place. 
There is not only the superficial knowledge  of ourselves, but there is also the 
deep, hidden content of our consciousness. How is one to examine it, how is one 
to expose the whole content of it? Is it to  be done bit by bit, slowly, gradually?—
or is it to be exposed totally and und erstood instantly, and thereby the whole 
analytical process comes to an end? 
Now we are going to go into this que stion of analysis. To the speaker, 
analysis is the denial of action; action being always in the active present. Action 
means not “having done” or “will do”, but doing . Analysis prevents that action in 
the present, because in analysis there is involved time, a gradua l peeling off as it 
were, layer after layer, and examining each layer, analysing the content of each layer. And if the analysis is not perfect, complete, true, then that analysis being 
incomplete, must leave a kno wledge which is not total. And the next analysis 
springs from that which is not complete. 
Look, I examine myself, analyse myself and if my analysis is not complete, 
then what I have analysed becomes th e knowledge with which I proceed to 
analyse the next layer. So in that proc ess each analysis be comes incomplete and 
leads to further conflict, and so to inacti on. And in analysis th ere is the analyser 
and the analysed, whether the analyser is the professional, or yourself, the 
layman; there is this duality, the analyser analysing something wh ich he thinks is 
different from himself. But the analyser, wh at is he? He is the past, he is the 
accumulated knowledge of a ll the things he has an alysed. And with that 
knowledge—which is the past —he analyses the present. 
So in that process there is conflict, there is the struggle to conform, or to force 
that which he analyses. Also there is this whole process of dreaming. I don’t 
know whether you have gone into all this yourself, or  probably you have read 
other people’s books, which is most unfort unate; because then you merely repeat 
what other people have said, however famo us they are. But if you don’t read all 
those books—as the speaker does not—the n you have to investigate yourself, 
then it becomes much more fascinating, much more original, much more direct 
and true. 
In the process of analysis there is this world of dreams. We accept dreams as 
necessary, because the professionals say,  “You must dream, otherwise you go 
mad”, and there is some truth in that. We  are enquiring into all this because we 
are trying to find out whether it is possibl e to change radically, when there is so 
much confusion, so much mi sery, such hatred and bruta lity in the worl d; there is 
no compassion. One must, if one is at all serious, enquire into all this. We are 
enquiring not merely for inte llectual entertainment but ac tually trying to find out 
if it is possible to change . And when we see the possibility of change, whatever we are, however shallow, however superfici al, repetitive, imitative, if we see that 
there is a possibility of radical change, then we have the energy to do so. If we 
say it is not possible, then that energy is dissipated. 
So we are enquiring into  this question, whether analysis does produce a 
radical change at all, or whether it is merely an intellectua l entertainment, an 
avoidance of action. As we were saying, analysis implies entering into the world 
of dreams. What are dreams, how do they come into being? I don’t know if you 
have gone into this; if yo u have, you will see that drea ms are the continuation of 
our daily life. What you are doing during th e day, all the mischief, the corruption, 
the hatred, the passing pleasures, the ambi tion, the guilt and so on, all that is 
continued in the world of dreams, only in  symbols, in pictures and images. These 
pictures and images have to be interpre ted and all the fuss and unreality of all 
that comes into being. 
One never asks why should one dream at all. One has accepted dreams as 
essential, as part of life. Now we are asking ourselves (if you are with me) why 
we dream at all. Is it possible when you go to sleep to have a mind that is 
completely quiet? Because it is only in th at quiet state that it renews itself, 
empties itself of all its content, so th at it is made fresh, young, decisive, not 
confused. 
If dreams are the continuation of our daily life, of our daily turmoil, anxiety, 
the desire for security, atta chment, then inevitably, dreams in th eir symbolic form 
must take place. That is clear, isn’t it? So one asks, “Why should one dream at all?” Can the brain cells be quiet, not carry on all the business of the day? 
One has to find that out experimentally, not accepting what the speaker 
says—and for goodness sake don’t ever do that, because we are sharing together, 
investigating together. You can test it out  by being totally awar e during the day, 
watching your thoughts, your motives, yo ur speech, the way you walk and talk. 
When you are so aware there are the in timations of the unconscious, of the 
deeper layers, because then  you are exposing, invitin g the hidden motives, the 
anxieties, the content of the unconscious to come into the ope n. So when you go 
to sleep, you will find  that your mind, including th e brain, is extraordinarily 
quiet. It is really resting,  because you have finished what you have been doing 
during the day. 
If you take stock of the day, as you go to bed and lie down—don’t you do 
this?—saying, “I should have done this, I should not have don e that”, “It would 
have been better that way, I wish I hadn’t said this”—wh en you take stock of the 
things that have happened during the day, then you are trying to bring about 
order before you go to sleep.  And if you don’t make orde r before you go to sleep, 
the brain tries to do it when  you are asleep. Because th e brain functions perfectly 
only in order, not in disorder. It functions most efficiently when there is complete 
order, whether that order is neurotic or rational; because in neurosis, in imbalance, there is order, and the brain accepts that order. 
So, if you take stock of everything th at has been happening during the day 
before you go to sleep, then you are tryi ng to bring about order, and therefore the 
brain does not have to br ing order while you are asleep: you have done it during 
the day. You can bring about that order ev ery minute during the day, that is if you are aware of everything that’s happening, outward ly and inwardly. 
Outwardly in the sense of being aware of the disorder about yo u, the cruelty, the 
indifference, the callousness, the dirt, th e squalor, the quarrels, the politicians and 
their chicanery—all that is happening. A nd your relationship with your husband, 
your wife, with your girl or boyfriend, be aware of  all that during the day, 
without correcting it, just be aware of it.  The moment you try to correct it, you 
are bringing disorder. But if  you merely observe actually what is, then what is, is 
order. 
It is only when you try to change “what is” that there is disorder; because you 
want to change according to the knowledge which you have  acquired. That 
knowledge is the past and you are trying to change “what is”—which is not the 
past—according to what you have learnt. Therefore th ere is a contradiction, 
therefore there is a distortion,  therefore this is disorder. 
So during the day, if you are aware of the ways of your thoughts, your 
motives, the hypocrisy, the double-talk—doing one thing, saying another, 
thinking another—the mask that you put on, the varieties of deception that one 
has so readily to hand, if you are aware of  all that during the day, you don’t have 
to take stock at all when you go to sleep , you are bringing order each minute. So 
when you do go to sleep you will find that your brain cells, which have recorded 
and hold the past, become totally quiet, and your sleep then becomes something 
entirely different. When we use the word “mind”, we include in that the brain, 
the whole nervous organism, the affecti ons, all the human structure; we mean all 
that, not something separate. In that is included the intellect, the heart, the whole 
nervous organism. When you go  to sleep then, the proce ss has totally come to an 
end, and when you wake up you see things exactly as they are, not your 
interpretation of them or th e desire to change them. 
So analysis, for the spea ker, prevents action. And action is absolutely 
essential in order to bring about this radi cal change. So analysis is not the way. 
Don’t accept, please, what the speaker is saying, but observe it for yourself, learn 
about it, not from me, but learn by watching all thes e implications of analysis: 
time, the analyser and th e analysed—the analyser is the analysed—and each 
analysis must be complete, otherwise it dist orts the next analysis. So to see that 
the whole process of analyses, whether it is  introspective or intellectual analysis, 
is totally wrong! It is not the way out—maybe it is necessary for those who are 
somewhat, or greatly, unbalanced; and perhaps most of us are unbalanced. 
We must find a way of observing the wh ole content of consciousness without 
the analyser. It is great fun if you go into this, because you have then rejected 
totally everything that man has said. Because then you  stand alone; when you 
find out for yourself, it will be authentic , real, true, not dependent on any 
professor, any psychologist, any analyst and so on. 
So one must find a way of observing w ithout analysis. I’m going to go into 
that—I hope you don’t mind  my doing all this, do you? This is not group 
therapy! ( Laughter ) This is not an open confession,  it is not that the speaker is 
analysing you, or making you change and become marvellous human beings! 
You have to do this yourself, and as most  of us are second-hand or third-hand 
human beings, it is going to be  very difficult to put away totally all that has been imposed on your minds by the professiona ls, whether by religious or scientific 
professionals. We have to  find out for ourselves. 
If analysis is not the way—and it is not, as  far as the speaker is concerned, as 
he has explained—then how is one to exam ine or to observe th e total content of 
consciousness? What is the content of consciousness? Please don’t repeat what 
somebody else has said. What is your tota l content? Have you ever looked at it, 
considered it? If you have, is it not the various record ed incidents, happenings, 
pleasurable and non-pleasurable, vari ous beliefs, traditions, the various 
individual recollections and memories, the racial and family memories, the 
culture in which one has be en brought up—all that is the content, isn’t it? And 
the incidents that take place every day,  the memories, the various pains, the 
unhappiness, the insults, all that is recorded. And that content is your 
consciousness—you, as a Catholic, or Pr otestant, living in this western world 
with the search for more and more and more, the world of great pleasure, 
entertainment, wealth, incessant noise of the television, the brutality—all that is 
you, that’s your content. 
How is all that to be exposed?—and in the exposing of it, is each incident, 
each happening, each tradition, each hurt, each pain to be examined one by one? 
Or is it to be looked at totally? If it is to be examined bit by bit, one by one, you 
are entering into the world of analysis and there is no end to that, you will die 
analysing—and giving a great deal of mone y to those who analyse, if that’s your 
pleasure. 
Now we’re going to find out how to l ook at these various fragments, which 
are the content of consciousness, totally—n ot analytically. We are going to find 
out how to observe without any analysis a t  a l l .  T h a t  i s ,  w e  h a v e  l o o k e d  a t  
everything—at the tree, at the cloud, at the wife and the husband, at the girl and 
the boy—as the observer and the observed. Please do gi ve a little attention to 
this. You have observed your anger, your greed or your jealousy, whatever it is, 
as an observer looking at greed. The observer is greed, but you have separated 
the observer because your mi nd is conditioned to the analytical process; therefore 
you are always looking at the tree, at the cloud, at everything in life as an 
observer and the thing observed. Have y ou noticed it? You look at your wife 
through the image which you have of her;  that image is the observer, it is the 
past, that image has been put togeth er through time. And the observer is the time, 
is the past, is the accumulated knowledge of th e various incidents, accidents, 
happenings, experiences and so on. That observer is the past, and he looks at the 
thing observed as though he were not of it, but separate from it. 
Now can you look without th e observer? Can you look at the tree without the 
past as the observer? That  is, when there is the obs erver, then there is space 
between the observer and the observed—the  tree. That space is time, because 
there is a distance. That time is the qua lity of the observer, who is the past, who 
is the accumulated knowledge, who says, “That is the tree ”, or “That is the image 
of my wife.” 
Can you look, not only at the tree, but at your wife or your husband, without 
the image? You know, this requires treme ndous discipline. I am going to show 
you something: discipline generally implie s conformity, drill, imitation, conflict between what is and what should be. And so in di scipline there is conflict: 
suppressing, overcoming, the exercise of will and so on—all that is implied in 
that word. But that word means to learn—not to conform, not to suppress, but to 
learn. And the quality of the mind that learns has its own order which is 
discipline. We are learning now to obse rve, without the observer, without the 
past, without the image. Wh en you so observe, the actual “what is”, is a living 
thing, not a thing looked up on as dead, recognizable by the past event, by past 
knowledge. 
Look, Sirs, let’s make it much simpler than this. You say something to me 
which hurts me, and the pain  of that hurt is record ed. The memory of that 
continues and when there is further pain, it is recorded again. So  the hurt is being 
strengthened from childhood on. Whereas, if I observ e it completely, when you 
say something which is painful to me, th en it is not recorded as a hurt. The 
moment you record it as a hurt, that reco rding is continued and for the rest of 
your life you are being hurt,  because you are adding to  that hurt. Whereas to 
observe the pain completely without recordin g it, is to give your total attention at 
the moment of the pain. Are you doing all this? 
Look, when you go ou t, when you walk in these st reets, there are all kinds of 
noise, all kinds of shouting, vulgarity, brutality, this noise  is pouring in. That is 
very destructive—the more sensitive you are the more destruc tive it becomes, it 
hurts your organism. You resist that hu rt and therefore yo u build a wall. And 
when you build a wa ll you are isolating yourself. Therefore you are strengthening 
the isolation, by which you will get mo re and more hurt. Whereas if you are 
observing that noise, are attentive to that noise, then you will see that your 
organism is never hurt. 
If you understand this one radical principle, you will have understood 
something immense: that wh ere there is an observer separating himself from the 
thing he observes, there must be conflict. Do what you will, as long as there is a 
division between the observer and the obse rved, there must be conflict. As long 
as there is division between  the Muslim and the Hindu,  between the Catholic and 
the Protestant, between the Black and the White, there must be conflict; you may tolerate each other, which is an inte llectual covering of intolerance. 
As long as there is division betwee n you and your wife, there must be 
conflict. This division exists fundamenta lly, basically, as long as there is the 
observer separate from the th ing observed. As long as I say, “Anger is different 
from me, I must control anger, I must ch ange, I must control my thoughts”, in 
that there is division, therefore there is conflict. Conflict implies suppression, 
conformity, imitation, all that  is involved in it. If you rea lly see the beauty of this, 
that the observer is  the observed, that the two ar e not separate, then you can 
observe the totality of consciousness w ithout analysis. Then  you see the whole 
content of it instantly. 
The observer is the thinker. We have given such tremendous importance to 
the thinker, haven’t we? We live by thought , we do things by thought, we plan 
our life by thought, our action is motivated by thought. And thought is worshipped throughout the wo rld as the most extraord inarily important thing, 
which is part of the intellect. And thought has separated itself as th e thinker. The thinker says, “These 
thoughts are no good”, “These  are better”, he says, “This ideal is better than that 
ideal”, “This belief is better than that belief”. It is all the product of thought—
thought which has made itself separate, fragmented itself as the thinker, as the 
experiencer. Thought has separated itself as  the higher self and the lower self—in 
India it is called the atman, the higher. Here  you call it the soul, or this or that. 
But it is still thought in operation. That’s clear, isn’t it? I mean, this is logical, it 
is not irrational. 
Now I am going to show you the irra tionality of it. All our books, all our 
literature, everything is thought. And ou r relationship is based on thought—just 
think of it! My wife is the image which I have  created by thinking. That thinking 
has been put together by nagging, by all the things which go on between husband 
and wife—pleasure, sex, the irritations, th e exclusions, all the separative instincts 
that go on. Our thought is the result of our relationship. Now what is thought? 
You are asked that question, “What is thought?” Please don’t repeat somebody 
else—find out for yourself. Surely thought is the response of memory, isn’t it?—
memory as knowledge, memory as expe rience which has been accumulated, 
stored up in the brain cells. So the brain cells themselves are the cells of memory. 
But if you did not think at all, you would be in a state of amnesia, you would not 
be able to get to your house. 
Thought is the response of the accumulated memory as knowledge, as 
experience—whether it is yours, or the inherited, the communal experience and 
so on. So thought is the response of th e past, which may project itself into the 
future, going through the present, modifyin g it as the future. But it is still the 
past. So thought is never free—how can it be? It can imagine what is freedom, it 
can idealize what freedom should be, create a Utopia of freedom. But thought 
itself, in itself, is of the past and therefore it is not free, it is always old. Please, it 
is not a question of your agreeing with the speaker, it is a fact. Thought organizes 
our life, based on the past. That thought, based on the past, projects what should be tomorrow and so there is conflict. 
From that arises a question, which is, fo r most of us, thought has given a great 
deal of pleasure. Pleasure is a guiding prin ciple in our life. We are not saying that 
it is wrong or right, we are examining it. Pleasure is th e thing that we want most. 
Here in this world and in the spiritual world, in heaven—if you have a heaven—
we want pleasure in any form—religious  entertainment, going to Mass, all the 
circus that goes on in the name of relig ion. And the pleasure  of any incident, 
whether it is of a sunset, or sexual, or  any sensory pleasure, is recorded and 
thought over. So thought as pleasure plays a tremendous part in our life. Something happened yesterday which was a most lovely thing, a most happy 
event, it is recorded; thought comes upon it, chews it and keeps on thinking about 
it and wants it repeated tomorrow, whether it be sexual or otherwise. So thought 
gives vitality to an incident that is over. 
The very process of record ing is knowledge, which is  the past, and thought is 
the past. So thought, as pl easure, is sustained. If you have noticed, pleasure is 
always in the past; or the imagined pleasure of tomorro w is still the recollection 
projected into the fu ture, from the past. You can also observe that where there is pleasure an d the pursuit of pleasure, 
there is also the nourishing of fear. Have n’t you noticed it? Fear of the thing I 
have done yesterday, fear of the physical pain which I had a week ago; thinking 
about it sustains the fear. There is no endi ng of that pain wh en it’s over. It is 
finished, but I carry it over  by thinking about it. 
So thought sustains and gives nourishm ent to pleasure as well as to fear. 
Thought is responsible for this . There is fear of the presen t, of the future, fear of 
death, fear of the unknown, fear of not fulfilling, fear of not being l oved, wanting 
to be loved—there are so many fears, a ll created by the machin ery of thought. So 
there is the rationality of thought and the irrationality of thought. 
There must be the exercise of thought in doing things. Tech nologically, in the 
office, when you cook, wh en you wash dishes—kno wledge must function 
perfectly. There is the rationality, the logi c of thought in action, in doing. But 
also thought becomes totally irrational when it sustains pleasure or fear. And yet 
thought says, “I cannot let go  of my pleasure”; yet thought knows, if it is at all 
sensitive or aware, that there is pain coming with it. 
So to be aware of all the machinery of  thought, of the complicated, subtle 
movement of thought! This is really not at all difficult once you say, “I must find 
out a way of living that is totally differe nt, a way of life in which there is no 
conflict.” If that is your real, your in sistent, passionate demand—as is your 
demand for pleasure—to live a life, inwardly  and outwardly in which there is no 
conflict whatsoever—then you will see the possibility of it. Because, as we have 
explained, conflict exists only when th ere is division between “me” and “not 
me”. Then if you see that, not verbally or intellectually—because that is not 
seeing—but when you actually realize that there is no division between the 
observer and the observed, be tween the thinker and the thought, then you see, 
then you observe actually “what is”. And when you see actually “what is”, you 
are already beyond it. You don’t stay w ith “what is”, you stay with “what is” 
only when the observer is different from the “what is”. Are you getting this? So 
when there is this comple te cessation of division betw een the observer and the 
observed, then “what is” is no longer what is. The mind has gone beyond it. 
 
Questioner: How can I change this identification of the observer with the 
observed? I can’t just agree with you an d say “Yes, it’s true ”, but have to do 
something about it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Quite right. Sir, there is no id entification at all. When you 
identify yourself with the observed, it is  still the pattern of thought, isn’t it? 
 
Questioner: Precisely, but how do I get out of that? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You don’t get out of it, I’ll show  it to you, Sir. Do you see the 
truth that the observer is th e observed?—the fact of it, the logic of it. Do you see 
that? Or don’t you? 
 
Questioner: It is still only a comment which arises; the truth does not exist. KRISHNAMURTI : The fact does not exist? 
 
Questioner: No, a commen t of agreement arises. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But you see that fact, don’t you? Don’t agree or disagree, this is 
a very serious thing; I wish I could talk about meditation, but no t now, for this is 
implied in it. Sir, see the im portance of this. The truth is that “I am anger”—not 
“I” am different from anger. That  is the truth, that is a fact, isn’t it? I am anger; 
not “I” separate from anger. When I am jealous, I am jealousy; not “I” am 
different from jealousy. I make myself se parate from jealousy because I want to 
do something about it, sustain it or get ri d of it or rationalize it, whatever it is. 
But the fact is, the “me” is jealous, isn’t it? 
Now how am I to act when I am jealous , when “me” is jealousy? Before, I 
thought “I” could act when I separated my self from jealousy, I thought I could do 
something about it, suppress it, rationaliz e it, or run away from it—do various 
things. I thought I was doing something. Here, I feel I am not doing anything. That is, when I say “I am jealousy”, I fe el I can’t move. Isn’t that right, Sir? 
Look at the two varieties of activity, at the action which takes place when you 
are different from jealousy, which is th e non-ending of jealousy. You may run 
away from it, you may suppress it, you may transcend it, you may escape, but it will come back, it will be there always, be cause there is the di vision between you 
and jealousy. Now there is a totally diffe rent kind of action when there is no 
division, because in that the observer is the observe d, he cannot do anything 
about it. Before, he was able to do so mething about it, now he feels he is 
powerless, he is frustrated, he can’t do anything. If the observer is  the observed, 
then there is no saying, “I can or can’ t do anything about it”—he is what he is. 
He is jealousy. Now, when he is j ealousy, what takes place? Go on, Sir! 
 
Questioner: He understands... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do look at it, take time. When  I think I am different from my 
jealousy, then I feel I can do something about it and in the doing of it there is 
conflict. Here on the other hand, when I rea lize the truth of it, that I am jealousy, 
that “I”, the observer, am the observed, then what takes place? 
 
Questioner: There is no conflict. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The element of conflict ceases. There conflict exists, here 
conflict does not exist. So conflict is  jealousy. Have you got  it? There has been 
complete action, an action in which there ha s been no effort at all, therefore it is 
complete, total, it w ill never come back. 
 
Questioner: You said analysis is the deadly tool to thought or consciousness. I 
perfectly agree with you and you were about to say t hat you would develop the 
argument that there are fragments in the brain or in thought or in consciousness which will be anti-analysis. I should be gr ateful, Sir, if you would continue to 
develop that part of the argument. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of what, Sir? 
 
Questioner: You mentioned the fragments will not constitute any conflict or 
struggle, they will be anti-analytical. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I just explained, Sir, there must  be fragmentation when there is 
the observer and the observed, as two different thi ngs. Sir, look, this is not an 
argument, there is nothing to develop. I have gone into it fairly thoroughly, we 
can spend of course lots more time, beca use the more deeply you go into it the 
more there is. We have broken up our life into many fragm ents, haven’t we?—
the scientist, the businessman, the artist,  the housewife and so on. What is the 
basis, what is the root of this fragmenta tion? The root of this fragmentation is the 
observer being separate from the observe d. He breaks up life: I am a Hindu and 
you are a Catholic, I am a Communist, you are a bourgeois. So there is this 
division going on all the time.  And I say, “Why is there this division, what causes 
this division?”—not only in  the external, economic, so cial structure, but much 
more deeply. This division is brought about by the “me” and the “not me”—the 
me that wants to be superior, famous , greater—whereas “you” are different. 
So the “me” is the observer, the “me” is the past, whic h divides the present as 
the past and the future. So as long as there is the observer, the experiencer, the 
thinker, there must be division. Where the observer is the observed, conflict 
ceases and therefore jealousy ceases. B ecause jealousy is conflict, isn’t it? 
 
Questioner: Is jealousy human nature? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is violence human nature? Is greed human nature? 
 
Questioner: I wanted to ask you another qu estion, if I may. Am I right or wrong, 
according to what you’ve been telling us, to say, as a man thinketh in his heart, so is he? So we must watch our thoughts and profit from experience. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s just it. As you think, wh at you think, you are. You think 
you are greater than somebody else, that you are inferior to somebody else, that 
you are perfect, that you are beautiful or not beautiful, that you are angry—what 
you think you are. That’s simple enough, isn’t it? One has to find out whether it 
is possible to live a life wh ere thought has its rational function, and see where 
thought becomes irrational. We’ll go into that tomorrow. 
 
Questioner: To continue with jealousy: wh en the jealousy is “me”, and “me” is 
the jealousy, the conflict ends, because I know it’s the jealousy  and it disappears. 
But when I listen to the noises in the st reet and the “me” is  the noise, and the 
noises are “me”, how can c onflict end when that noise will go on for ever? 
 KRISHNAMURTI : It’s fairly simple, Madam. I walk  down the street and that noise 
is terrible. And when I say that noise is  “me”, the noise does not end, it goes on. 
Isn’t that the question? But I don’t say the noise is me, I don’t say the cloud is 
me, or the tree is me, why should I say the noise is me? We pointed out just now, 
that if you observe, if you sa y, “I listen to that noise”, listen completely, not with 
resistance, then that noise may go on for ever, it does not affect you. The moment 
you resist, you are separate from the noise—not identify yourself with the 
noise—I don’t know if you see the diffe rence. The noise goes on, I can cut 
myself off from it by resisting it, putting a wall between myself and that noise. 
Then what takes place, when I resist something? There is conflict, isn’t there? 
Now can I listen to that noise w ithout any resistance whatsoever? 
 
Questioner: Yes, if you know that the noise might stop in an hour! 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No that is still part of your resistance. 
 
Questioner: That means that I can listen to the noise in the stre et for the rest of 
my life with the possibility I might become deaf. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, listen, Madam, I am saying something entirely different. 
We are saying, as long as there is resistance, there must be conflict. Whether I 
resist my wife, or my husband, whether I resist the noise of a dog barking, or the 
noise in the street, there mu st be conflict. Now, how is  one to listen to the noise 
without conflict—not whether it will go on indefinitely, or hoping it will come to 
an end—but how to listen to the noise with out any conflict? That is what we are 
talking about. You can listen to the noise  when the mind is completely free of 
any form of resistance—not only to that noise, but to everything in life—to your 
husband, to your wife, to your children, to the politician. Therefore what takes 
place? Your listening becomes much mo re acute, you beco me much more 
sensitive, and therefore noise is only a part , it isn’t the whole world. The very act 
of listening is more important than the noise, so listening becomes the important 
thing and not the noise. 
 
NEW YORK CITY 
18 APRIL 1971 2 
 
 
RELATIONSHIP  
 
 
Relationship. “You are the world.” The separate self; corruption. To 
see what actually “is”. What love is not. “We have no passion; we 
have lust, we have pleasure.” To understand what death is. Love is its own eternity. 
Questions: The concept of good and bad; sharing; pain and fear; how 
to be free of the past? 
 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I would like to talk about relati onship, about what love is, about 
human existence in which is involved our daily living, the problems one has, the 
conflicts, the pleasures and the fears, and that most extraordin ary thing one calls 
death. 
I think one has to understand, not as  a theory, not as  a speculative, 
entertaining concept, but ra ther as an actual fact—tha t we are the world and the 
world is us. The world is each one of us; to feel that, to be really committed to it 
and to nothing else, brings about a feeling of gr eat responsibility and an action 
that must not be fragmentary, but whole. 
I think we are apt to forget that our society, the culture in which we live, 
which has conditioned us, is the result of human endeavour, conflict, human 
misery and suffering. Each one  of us is that culture; the community is each one 
of us—we are not separate from it. To feel this, not as an intellectual idea or a 
concept, but to actually feel the reality of  this, one has to go into the question of 
what is relationship; because our life, our existence, is based on relationship. Life 
is a movement in relationship. If we do not understand what is implied in 
relationship, we inevitably not only isolate ourselves,  but create a society in 
which human beings are divided, not only  nationally, religiously, but also in 
themselves and therefore th ey project what they ar e into the outer world. 
I do not know if you have gone into this question deep ly for yourself, to find 
out if one can live with an other in total harmony, in complete accord, so that 
there is no barrier, no division, but a feeling of complete unity. Because 
relationship means to be related—not in ac tion, not in some project, not in an 
ideology—but to be tota lly united in the sense that the division, the 
fragmentation between individuals, between  two human beings, does not exist at 
all at any level. 
Unless one finds this relationship, it seem s to me that when we try to bring 
order in the world, theoretically or technologically, we are bound to create not 
only deep divisions between man and man, bu t also we shall be unable to prevent 
corruption. Corruption begins in  the lack of relationship; I think that is the root of 
corruption. Relationship as we know it now is the continua tion of division between individuals. The root meaning of that word individual means 
“indivisible”. A human being who is in himself not divi ded, not fragmented, is 
really an individual. But mo st of us are not individual s; we think we are, and 
therefore there is the opposition of the individual to the co mmunity. One has to 
understand not only the meaning of that  word individuality in the dictionary 
sense, but in that deep se nse in which there is no fragm entation at all. That means 
perfect harmony between the mind, the he art and the physical organism. Only 
then an individuality exists. 
If we examine our present relationship wi th each other closely, be it intimate 
or superficial, deep or passing, we see it is fragmented. Wife or husband, boy or 
girl, each lives in his own ambition, in pe rsonal and egotistic pursuits, in his own 
cocoon. All these contribute to  the factor of bringing about an image in himself 
and therefore his relationship with another is through that imag e, therefore there 
is no actual relationship. 
I do not know if you are aware of the structure and the nature of this image 
that one has built around ones elf and in oneself. Each person is doing this all the 
time, and how can there be a relationship w ith another, if there is that personal 
drive, envy, competition, greed and all the rest of thos e things which are 
sustained and exaggerated in modern soci ety? How can there be relationship with 
another, if each one of us is pursuing his own personal achievement, his own 
personal success? 
I do not know if one is at all aware of  this. We are so conditioned that we 
accept it as the norm, as the pattern of life, that each  one must pursue his own 
particular idiosyncrasy or tendency, and yet try to es tablish a relationship with 
another in spite of this. Isn’t that what  we are all doing? You may be married and 
you go to the office or to the factory; whatever you are doing during the whole of 
the day, you pursue that. And your wife is  in her house, with her own troubles, 
with her own vanities, with  all that happens. Where is the relationship between 
those two human beings? Is it in bed, in sex? Is a relationship so superficial, so 
limited, so circumscribed, not in itself corruption? 
One may ask: how then are you to live, if yo u do not go to the office, pursue 
your own particular ambiti on, your own desire to ac hieve and to attain? If one 
does not do any of this, what is one to  do? I think that is a wrong question 
altogether, don’t you? Because  we are concerned, are we  not, in bringing about a 
radical change in the whole structure of the mind. The crisis is not in the outer 
world, but in consciousne ss itself. And until we understand this crisis, not 
superficially, not according to some philosopher, but actually deeply understand it for ourselves by looking into it and examin ing it, we shall not be able to bring 
about a change. We are concerned with  psychological revolution and this 
revolution can only ta ke place when there is the right kind of relationship 
between human beings. 
How is such a relationship to be brought about? The problem is clear, isn’t it? 
Please, share this problem with me, will you? It’s your probl em, not my problem; 
it’s your life, not my life, it’s your sorrow, your trouble, your anxiety, your guilt. 
This battle is one’s life. If you listen mere ly to a description, then you will find 
that you are only swimming on the surface and not resolving any problem at all. It is actually your problem, and the speaker is merely describing it—knowing 
that the description is not the describe d. Let us share this problem together, 
which is: how can human beings, you and I,  find a right relationship in all this 
turmoil, hatred, destruction, pollution, and among these terrible things which are 
going on in the world? 
To find that out, it seems to me, one mu st examine what is taking place, see 
what actually “is”. Not what we should like  to think it should be , or try to change 
our relationship to a future concept, but  actually observe what it is now. In 
observing the fact, the truth, the actuality of it, there is a po ssibility of changing 
it. As we said the other day,  when there is a possibility then ther e is great energy. 
What dissipates energy is the idea that it is not possible to change. 
So we must look at our relationship as it is actually now, every day; and in 
observing what it is, we shall discover how to bring about a change in that 
actuality. So we are describing what actual ly is, which is: each one lives in his 
own world, in his world of ambition, greed , fear, the desire to succeed and all the 
rest of it—you know what is going on. If I am marrie d, I have responsibilities, 
children, and all the rest of it. I go to the office, or some place of work, and we 
meet each other, husband and wife, boy and a girl, in bed. And that’s what we 
call love, leading separate lives, isolat ed, building a wall of resistance round 
ourselves, pursuing a self-centred activ ity; each one is seeking security 
psychologically, each one is dependi ng on the other for comf ort, for pleasure, for 
companionship; because each one  is so deeply lonely, ea ch demands to be loved, 
to be cherished, each one is trying to dominate the other. 
You can see this for yourse lf, if you observe yoursel f. Is there any kind of 
relationship at all? There is no relati onship between two human beings, though 
they may have children, a house, actually  they are not related. If they have a 
common project, that project sustains them , holds them together, but that’s not 
relationship. 
Realizing all this, one sees that if there is no relationship between two human 
beings, then corruption begins—not in th e outward structure of society, in the 
outer phenomenon of pollution, but in ner pollution, corruption, destruction 
begins, when human beings ha ve actually no relationship at all, as you haven’t. 
You may hold the hand of another, kiss e ach other, sleep together, but actually, 
when you observe very closel y, is there any relationship at all? To be related 
means not to be dependent on each ot her, not to escape from your loneliness 
through another, not to try to find comf ort, companionship, through another. 
When you seek comfort thro ugh another, are dependent and all the rest of it, can 
there be any kind of rela tionship? Or are you th en using each other? 
We are not being cynical, but actually obs erving what is: that is not cynicism. 
So to find out what it actually means to be related to another, one must 
understand this question of loneliness, because most of us are terribly lonely; the 
older we grow the more lonely we become , especially in this  country. Have you 
noticed the old people, what  they are like? Have you no ticed their escapes, their 
amusements? They have worked  all their lives and they want to escape into some 
kind of entertainment. Seeing this, can we find a way of livi ng in which we don’t use another?—
psychologically, emotionally, not depend on another, not use another as a means 
of escape from our own tortures, from our own despairs, from our own 
loneliness. 
To understand this is to understand what  it means to be lonely. Have you ever 
been lonely? Do you know  what it means?—that you have no relationship with 
another, are completely isolated. You may be with your fa mily, in a crowd, or in 
the office, wherever you are,  when this complete sense of utter loneliness with its 
despair suddenly comes upon you. Till you solve that completely, your 
relationship becomes a means of escape an d therefore it leads to corruption, to 
misery. How is one to understand this loneliness, this sense of complete 
isolation? To understand it, one has to look at one’s ow n life. Is not your every 
action a self-centred activity? You may oc casionally be charita ble, generous, do 
something without any motiv e—those are rare occasions. This despair can never 
be dissolved through escap e, but by observing it. 
So we have come back to this questio n, which is: how to observe? How to 
observe ourselves, so that in  that observation there is no conflict at all? Because 
conflict is corruption, is waste of energy,  it is the battle of our life, from the 
moment we are born till we die. Is it possi ble to live without a single moment of 
conflict? To do that, to find that out for ourselves, one has to learn how to observe our whole movement. There is observation which becomes harmonious, which is true, when the observer is not, but only observation. We went into that 
the other day. 
When there is no relationshi p can there be love? We talk about it, and love, as 
we know it, is related to sex and pleasur e, isn’t it? Some of you say “No”. When 
you say “No”, then you must be without ambition, then there must be no 
competition, no division—as you and me, we and they. There must be no 
division of nationality, or the division brought about by belief, by knowledge. 
Then, only, can you say you love. But for most people love is related to sex and pleasure and all the travail that comes with it: jealousy, envy, antagonism, you 
know what happens betwee n man and woman. When that relationship is not true, 
real, deep, completely harm onious, then how can you ha ve peace in the world? 
How can there be an end to war? 
So relationship is one of the most, or ra ther the most important thing in life. 
That means that one has to  understand what love is. Surely, one comes upon it, 
strangely, without asking for it. When you find out for yo urself what love is not, 
then you know what love is—not theo retically, not verbally—but when you 
realize actually what it is not, which is: not to have a mind that is competitive, 
ambitious, a mind that is striving, comparing, imitating; such a mind cannot 
possibly love. 
So can you, living in this world, live completely without ambition, 
completely without ever co mparing yourself with anot her? Because the moment 
you compare, then there is conflict, there is  envy, there is the de sire to achieve, to 
go beyond the other. 
Can a mind and a heart that remembers th e hurts, the insults, the things that 
have made it insensitive and dull—can such a mind and he art know what love is? Is love pleasure? And yet that is wh at we are pursuing, consciously or 
unconsciously. Our gods are the result of our pleasure. Our beliefs, our social 
structure, the morality of society—which is  essentially immoral—is the result of 
our pursuit of pleasure. An d when you say, “I love somebody”, is it love? That 
means: no separation, no domination, no self-centred activity. To find out what it 
is, one must deny all this—deny it in the sense of seeing the falseness of it. When 
you once see something as false—which you have accepted as true, as natural, as human—then you can never go back to it; wh en you see a danger ous snake, or a 
dangerous animal, you never play with it, you never come near it. Similarly, when you actually see that l ove is none of these things, feel it, observe it, chew it, 
live with it, are totally committed to it, then you will know what love is, what 
compassion is—which means passion for everyone. 
We have no passion; we ha ve lust, we have pleasure . The root meaning of the 
word passion is sorrow. We have all ha d sorrow of some kind or another, losing 
somebody, the sorrow of sel f-pity, the sorrow of the human race, both collective 
and personal. We know what sorrow is, the death of someone whom you 
consider you have loved. When we re main with that so rrow totally, without 
trying to rationalize it, without trying to escape from it in any form through 
words or through action, when you re main with it comple tely, without any 
movement of thought, then you will find, out of that sorrow comes passion. That 
passion has the quality of love, and love has no sorrow. 
One has to understand this whole question of existence, the conflicts, the 
battles: you know the life that one lead s, so empty, so meaningless. The 
intellectuals try to give it a meaning and we also want to find si gnificance to life, 
because life has no meaning as it is liv ed. Has it? The constant struggle, the 
endless work, the misery, the suffering, th e travail that one goe s through in life, 
all that has actually no meaning—we go through it as a habit.  But to find out 
what the significance is, one must also  understand the signi ficance of death; 
because living and dying go  together, they are not two separate things. 
So one must enquire what it means to die,  because that is part of our living. 
Not something in the distant future, to be avoided, only to be faced when one is 
desperately ill, in old age or in an accident , or on a battlefield. As it is part of our 
daily life to live without a singl e breath of conflict, so it is part of our life to find 
out what it means to love. That is also  part of our existence, and one must 
understand it. 
How do we understand wh at death is? When you ar e dying, at the last 
moment, can you understand the way you have lived?—th e strains, the emotional 
struggles, the ambitions, the drive; you ar e probably unconscious and that makes 
you incapable of clear perception. Then th ere is the deterioration of the mind in 
old age and all the rest of it. So on e has to understand what death is now , not 
tomorrow. As you observe, thought does no t want to think about it. It thinks 
about all the things it w ill do tomorrow—how to make  new inventions, better 
bathrooms, all the things that thought can think about. But it does not want to 
think about death, because it does not know what it means. 
Is the meaning of death to be found th rough the process of thought? Please do 
share this. When we share it, then we will begin to see the beauty of all this, but if you sit there and let the speaker go on, merely listening to his words, then we 
don’t share together. Sharing together implies a certain quality of care, attention, 
affection, love. Death is a tremendous problem. The young people may say: why 
do you bother about it? But it is part of th eir life, as it is pa rt of their life to 
understand celibacy. Don’t just say, “Why do you talk about celibacy, that’s for 
the old fogeys, that’s for the stupid monks. ” What it means to be celibate has also 
been a problem for human beings, that also is part of life. 
Can the mind be completely chaste? No t being able to find out how to live a 
chaste life, one takes vows  of celibacy and goes through  tortures. That is not 
celibacy. Celibacy is something entirely differe nt. It is to have a mind that is free 
from all images, from all knowledge; wh ich means understanding the whole 
process of pleasure and fear. 
Similarly, one has to unde rstand this thing called d eath. How do you proceed 
to understand something of which you are terribly frightened? Aren’t we 
frightened of death? Or we say, “Thank  God I’m going to die, I’ve had enough of 
this life with all the misery of it, the c onfusion, the shoddiness, the brutality, the 
mechanical things by whic h one is caught, thank God a ll this will end!” That is 
not an answer; nor is it to rationalize death,  or to believe in some reincarnation, 
as the whole Asiatic world do es. To find out what rein carnation means, which is 
to be born in a future existence, yo u must find out what you are now. If you 
believe in reincarnation, what are you now? —a lot of words, a lot of experience, 
of knowledge; you are conditioned by various cultures, you are all the 
identifications of your life, your furniture, your house, your bank account, your experiences of pleasure and pain. That ’s what you are, aren’t you? The 
remembrance of the failures, the hopes, the despairs, all that  you are now, and 
that is going to be bo rn in the next life—a lovely idea, isn’t it! 
Or you think there is a permanent soul, a permanen t entity. Is there anything 
permanent in you? The moment you say th ere is a permanent soul, a permanent 
entity, that entity is the re sult of your thinking, or the result of your hopes, 
because there is so much insecurity, everything is transient, in a flux, in a 
movement. So when you say there is some thing permanent, that permanency is 
the result of your thinking. And thought is  of the past, thought is never free—it 
can invent anything it likes! 
So if you believe in a futu re birth, then you must know that the future is 
conditioned by the way you li ve now, what you do now,  what you think, what 
your acts are, your ethics . So what you are now, wh at you do now, matters 
tremendously. But those people who believe  in a future birth don’t give a pin 
about what happens now, it’ s just a matter of belief. 
So, how do you find  out what death means, when  you are living with vitality, 
with energy, full of health ? Not when you are unbalanced, or ill, not at the last 
moment, but now, knowing the organism mu st inevitably wear  out, like every 
machinery. Unfortunately we use our ma chinery so disrespectfully, don’t we? 
Knowing the physical organism comes to an end, have you ever thought about 
what it means to die? You can’t think about it. Have you ever experimented to find out what it means to die psychol ogically, inwardly?—not how to find 
immortality, because eternity, that which is timeless, is now, not in some distant future. To enquire in to that, one must understand th e whole problem of time; not 
only chronological time, by the watch, but the time that thought has invented as a 
gradual process of change. 
How does one find out about this strange  thing that we all have to meet one 
day or another? Can you di e psychologically today, di e to everything that you 
have known? For instance: to die to yo ur pleasure, to your attachment, your 
dependence, to end it without arguing, without rationalizing, without trying to 
find ways and means of avoiding it. Do  you know what it means to die, not 
physically, but psychologica lly, inwardly? Whic h means to put an  end to that 
which has continuity; to put an end to your ambition, be cause that’s what’s going 
to happen when you die, isn’t it? You can ’t carry it over and sit next to God! 
(Laughter) When you actually die,  you have to end so many things without any 
argument. You can’t say to death, “Let me finish my job, let me finish my book, 
all the things I have not done, let me h eal the hurts which I have given others”—
you have no time. 
So can you find out how to live a life now, today, in which there is always an 
ending to everything that you began? Not in your office of course, but inwardly 
to end all the knowledge that you ha ve gathered—knowl edge being your 
experiences, your memories, your hur ts, the comparativ e way of living, 
comparing yourself always w ith somebody else. To end all that every day, so that 
the next day your mind is fresh and young. Such a mind can never be hurt, and that is innocence. 
One has to find out for oneself what it means to die; then there is no fear, 
therefore every day is a new da y—and I really mean this, one can do this—so 
that your mind and your eyes see life as something totally new.  That is eternity. 
That is the quality of the mind that has come upon this timele ss state, because it 
has known what it means to die every day to everything it has collected during the day. Surely, in that there is love. Love is something totally new every day, 
but pleasure is not, pleasure has continuity . Love is always ne w and therefore it 
is its own eternity. 
Do you want to ask any questions? 
 
Questioner: Supposing, Sir, that throug h complete, objective, self-observation I 
find that I am greedy,  sensual, selfish and all that. Then how can I know whether 
this kind of living is good or bad, unless I have already some preconceptions of 
the good? If I have these preconceptions , they can only derive from self-
observation. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Quite, Sir. 
 
Questioner: I also find another difficulty. You seem to believe in sharing, but at 
the same time you say that two lovers, or husband and wife, cannot base their 
love, shouldn’t base their love, on comforting each other. I don’t see anything 
wrong in comforting each other—that is sharing. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : The gentleman says, “One must  have a concept of the good, 
otherwise, why should one give up all this  ambition, greed, envy and all the rest 
of it?” You can have a formula or a concep t of what is better, but can you have a 
concept of what is good? 
 
Questioner: Yes, I think so. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Can thought produce what is good? 
 
Questioner: No, I meant the conception of such good. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, Sir. The conception of good  is the product of thought; 
otherwise how can you c onceive what is good? 
 
Questioner: The conceptions can only be  derived from our self-observation. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I’m just pointing that out, Si r. Why should you have a concept 
of the good at all? 
 
Questioner: Otherwise how do I know  whether my life is good or bad? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Just listen to the question. D on’t we know what conflict is? Do I 
have to have a concept of non-conflict be fore I am aware of conflict? I know 
what conflict is—the struggle, the pain . Don’t I know that, without knowing a 
state when there is no conf lict? When I formulate what  is good, I will formulate 
it according to my conditioning,  according to my way of thinking, feeling, my 
particular idiosyncrasy and all the rest of  my cultural conditioning. Is the good to 
be projected by thought?—and  will thought then tell me what is good and bad in 
my life? Or has goodness nothing whatsoev er to do with thought, or with a 
formula? Where does goodness flower?—do tell me. In a concept? In some idea, 
in some ideal that lies in  the future? A concept mean s a future, a tomorrow. It 
may be very far away, or very close, but it is still in time. And when you have a 
concept, projected by thought—though t being the response of memory, the 
response of accumulated knowledge depend ing on the culture in which you have 
lived—do you find that good ness in the future, created  by thought? Or do you 
find it when you begin to understand conflict, pain and sorrow? 
So in the understanding of “what is”— not by comparing “what is” with “what 
should be”—in that understanding fl owers goodness. Su rely, goodness has 
nothing whatsoever to do w ith thought—has it? Has love got anything to do with 
thought? Can you cultivate love by formulating it and saying, “My ideal of love 
is that”? Do you know what happens when you cultivate love? You are not 
loving. You th ink you will have love at some future date; in the meantime you 
are violent. So is goodness the product of thought? Is love the product of 
experience, of knowledge? What was the second question, Sir? 
 
Questioner: The second qu estion was about sharing. KRISHNAMURTI : What do you share? What are we  sharing now? We talked about 
death, we talked about lo ve, about the necessity of  total revolution, about 
complete psychological change, not to li ve in the old pattern of formulas, of 
struggle, pain, imitation, conformity and a ll the rest of those things man has lived 
for through millennia and has produced this marvellous, messy world! We have 
talked about death. How do we share th at together?—share the understanding of 
it, not the verbal statement, not the descri ption, not the explanations of it? What 
does sharing mean?—to share the understa nding, to share the truth which comes 
with the understanding. And what do es understanding mean? You tell me 
something which is serious, which is vital, which is relevant, important, and I 
listen to it completely, becau se it is vital to me. To listen vitally, my mind must 
be quiet, mustn’t it? If I am chattering, if I am looking somewhere else, if I am comparing what you are saying with what I know, my mind is not quiet. It is only 
when my mind is quiet and listens comple tely, that there is the understanding of 
the truth of the thing. That we share together, otherwis e we can’t share; we can’t 
share the words—we can only  share the truth of something. You and I can only 
see the truth of something when the mind is totally committed to the observation. 
To see the beauty of a sunset, th e lovely hills, the shadows and the 
moonlight—how do you share it with a frie nd? By telling him, “Do look at that 
marvellous hill”? You may say it, but is that sharing? When you actually share 
something with another, it m eans you must both have the same intensity, at the 
same time, at the same level. Otherwise you can’t share, can you? You must both 
have a common interest, at the same le vel, with the same passion—otherwise 
how can you share something? You can sh are a piece of bread—but that’s not 
what we are talking about. 
To see together—which is sharing together—we must both of us see; not 
agree or disagree, but see together what actually is; not interpret it according to 
my conditioning or your conditioning, bu t see together what it is. And to see 
together one must be free to observe, one must be free to listen. That means to 
have no prejudice. Then only , with that quality of love, is there sharing. 
 
Questioner: How can one quieten, or free  the mind, from interruptions by the 
past? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You cannot quieten the mind: full stop! Those are tricks. You 
can take a pill and make the mind quiet— you absolutely canno t make the mind 
quiet, because you are the mind . You can’t say, “I will make my mind quiet”. 
Therefore one has to understand what meditation is—actually, not what other 
people say it is. One has to  find out whether the mind ca n ever be quiet; not: how 
to make the mind quiet. So one has to go into this whole question of knowledge, 
and whether the mind, the brain cells, which are loaded with all the past 
memories, can be absolutely  quiet and come into function when necessary; and 
when it is not necessary, be co mpletely and wholly quiet. 
 Questioner: Sir, when you speak of relationships, you speak always of a man and 
a woman or a girl and a boy. Will the sa me things you say about relationships 
also apply to a man and a ma n, or a woman and a woman? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Homosexuality? 
 
Questioner: If you wish to give it that name, Sir, yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You see, when we are talking of  love, whether it is of man and 
man, woman and woman, or man and woman, we are not talking of a particular 
kind of relationship, we are talking ab out the whole movement, the whole sense 
of relationship, not a rela tionship with one, or two.  Don’t you know what it 
means to be related to the world?—when you feel you are the world. Not as an 
idea—that’s appalling—but actually to feel that you are responsible, that you are 
committed to this respon sibility. That is the onl y commitment; not to be 
committed through bombs, or committed to a particular activity, but to feel that you are the world and the world is you. Unless you change completely, radically, 
and bring about a total muta tion in yourself, do what you will outwardly, there 
will be no peace for man. If you feel that in your blood, then your questions will 
be related entirely to the present and to bringing about a change in the present, 
not to some speculative ideals. 
 
Questioner: The last time we were togeth er, you were telling us that if someone 
has a painful experience and it is not fully  faced, or is avoided, it goes into the 
unconscious as a fragment. How are we to free ourselves from these fragments of 
painful and fearful experiences, so t hat the past won’t have a grip on us? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, Sir, that is conditioning . How does one free oneself from 
this conditioning? How do I free myself from my conditioning of the culture in 
which I was born? First, I must be aware that I am conditioned—not somebody telling me that I am conditioned. Yo u understand the difference? If somebody 
tells me I am hungry, that ’s something different from actually being hungry. So I 
must be aware of my conditioning, which means, I must be aware of it not only 
superficially, but at the deep er levels. That is, I must be aware totally. To be so 
aware, means that I am not trying to go beyond the conditioning , not trying to be 
free of the conditioning. I must see it as  it actually is, not bring in another 
element, such as: wanting to be free of  it, because that is an escape from 
actuality. I must be aware. What does that mean ? To be aware of my 
conditioning totally, not pa rtially, means my mind mu st be highly sensitive, 
mustn’t it? Otherwise I can’t be awar e. To be sensitive means to observe 
everything very, very closel y—the colours, the quality of people, all the things 
around me. I must also be aware of what actually is without any choice. Can you do that?—not trying to interpret it, not trying to change it, not trying to go 
beyond it or trying to be free of it—just to be totally aware of it. 
When you observe a tree, between you and the tree th ere is time and space, 
isn’t there? And there is also the botanical knowledge abou t it, the distance between you and the tree—which is time—and the separation which comes 
through knowledge of the tree. To look at that tree without knowledge, without 
the time-quality, does not mean identifying yo urself with the tree, but to observe 
the tree so attentively, that the boundaries of time don’t  come into it at all; the 
boundaries of time come in  only when you have knowledge about the tree. Can 
you look at your wife, or your friend, or whatever it is without the image? The 
image is the past, which has been put t ogether by thought, as nagging, bullying, 
dominating, as pleasure, companionship and all that. It is the image that 
separates; it is the image that creates di stance and time. Look at that tree, or the 
flower, the cloud, or the wife or  the husband, with out the image! 
If you can do that, then you can observe your conditio ning totally; then you 
can look at it with a mind that is not s potted by the past, and therefore the mind 
itself is free of conditioning.  To look at myself—as we  generally do—I look as 
an observer looking at the observed: myself as the observed and the observer 
looking at it. The observer is the knowledge, is the past, is time, the accumulated 
experiences—he separates hims elf from the thing observed. 
Now, to look without the observer! Yo u do this when yo u are completely 
attentive. Do you know what it means to be attentive? Don’t go to school to learn 
to be attentive! To be a ttentive means to listen withou t any interpretation, without 
any judgement—just to liste n. When you are so listeni ng there is no boundary, 
there is no “ you” listening. There is only a stat e of listening. So when you 
observe your conditioning, the conditioning exists only in the observer, not in the 
observed. When you look withou t the observer, without the “ me”—his fears, his 
anxieties and all the rest of it—then you wi ll see, you enter into a totally different 
dimension. 
 
NEW YORK CITY 
24 APRIL 1971 3 
 
 
RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE. MEDITATION  
 
 
Is there a religious experience? Search for truth; the meaning of 
search. “What is a religious mind?” “What is the quality of mind 
which is no longer experiencing?” Discipline; virtue; order. Meditation is not an escape. The function of knowledge and freedom 
from the known. “Meditation is to find out if there is a field not 
already contaminated by the known.” “The first step is the last step.” 
Questions: The analogy of dirt; awareness; consciousness; love; 
psychological time. 
 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We said that we would talk over together a very complex 
problem, which is: is there a religious ex perience, and what are the implications 
of meditation? If one observes, it appe ars that throughout the world man has 
always been seeking someth ing beyond his own death, beyond his own problems, 
something that will be endu ring, true and timeless. He  has called it God, he has 
given it many names; and most  of us believe in someth ing of that kind, without 
ever actually experiencing it. 
Various religions have promised that if you believe in certai n forms of rituals, 
dogmas, saviours, you might, if you lead a certain kind of life, come upon this 
strange thing, whatever name one likes to give to it. And thos e who have directly 
experienced it, have done it according to  their conditioning, to their belief, to 
their environmental and cultural influences. 
Apparently religion has lost its meaning, because there have been religious 
wars; religion does not answer all our  problems, religions have separated 
peoples. They have brough t about some kind of civ ilizing influence, but they 
have not changed man radica lly. When one begins to en quire if there is such a 
thing as religious experience and what  that experience is, why one calls it 
“religious”, obviously one must  first have a great deal of honesty. It is not to be 
honest according to a principle or a belie f, or to some form of commitment, but 
to honestly see things exactly as they are, without any distortion, not only 
outwardly, but also inwardly: never to deceive oneself. For deception is quite 
easy if one craves for some kind of expe rience, call it religious or otherwise—if 
one takes a trip and so on. Then you are bound to be caught in some kind of 
illusion. 
One has to find out for oneself, if one ca n, what religious experience is. One 
needs a great sense of humility and honesty, which means never to ask for experience, never to demand for oneself a reality or an  achievement. So one has 
to look very closely at one’s own desi res, attachments and fears and understand 
them wholly, if one can, so that the mind is in no way distorted, so that there will be no illusion, no deception.  And one has to ask also: what does it mean to 
experience? 
I do not know if you have gone  into that question at a ll. Most of us are bored 
with the usual experiences of every day. We are tired of them all, and the more 
one is sophisticated, intellectual, the mo re one wants to live only in the present—
whatever that may mean—and invent a philosophy of the pr esent. The word 
experience means to go through , to go right to the end and finish with it. But 
unfortunately for most of us, every experi ence leaves a scar, a memory, pleasant 
or unpleasant, and we want to retain only  the pleasant ones. When we are asking 
for any kind of spiritual, re ligious, or transcendental experience, we must try to 
find out first of all whether there is such an experience, and al so what experience 
itself means. If you experience something an d you cannot recognize it, then that 
experience ceases to be. One of the e ssential meanings of experience is 
recognition. And when ther e is recognition, it has already been known, has 
already been experienced, otherwise you could not recognize it. 
So when they talk about religious, spiritual, or transcendental experience—
that word is so misused— you must already have kn own it, to be able to 
recognize that you are experi encing something other than  an ordinary experience. 
It seems logical and true that the mind mu st be able to recognize the experience, 
and recognition implies something you ha ve already known, therefore it is not 
new. 
When you want experience in the relig ious field, you want it because you 
have not solved your problems, your daily anxieties, despairs, fears and sorrows, 
therefore you want something more. In th at demand for more lies deception. That 
is fairly logical and true, I think. Not that  logic is always true , but when one uses 
logic and reason healthily, sanely, one knows the limitations of reason. The 
demand for wider, deeper, mo re fundamental experience s only leads to a further 
extension of the path of the known. I th ink that is clear, and I hope we are 
communicating, sharing with each other. 
Then also in this religious  enquiry one is seeking to find out what truth is, if 
there is a reality, if there is such a thin g as a state of mind that is beyond time. 
Search again implies a seeker—doesn’t it?  And what is he seeking? How will he 
know that what he has foun d in his search is true? Ag ain, if he finds what is 
true—at least what he thinks is true —that depends on his conditioning, on his 
knowledge, on his past experiences; search then merely becomes a further 
projection of his own past hopes, fears and longings. 
A mind that is enquiring— not seeking—must be totally  free of these two, that 
is, of the demand for experience and th e search for truth. One can see why, 
because when you are seeking, you go to various teach ers, read various books, 
join various cults, follow various gurus and all the rest of it, like window-
shopping. Such a search has no meaning whatsoever. 
So when you are enquiring into this question, “What is a religious mind, and 
what is the quality of mind that is no longer experiencing anything at all?”—you 
must find out if the mind can be free from the demand for experience and can 
completely end all seeking.  One has to investigate wi thout any motive, without 
any purpose, the facts of time and if there is  a timeless state. To enquire into that means to have no belief wh atsoever, not to be  committed to any religion, to any 
so-called spiritual organization, not to fo llow any guru, and therefore to have no 
authority whatsoever—includi ng that of the speaker es pecially. Because you are 
very easily influenced, you are te rribly gullible, thou gh you may be 
sophisticated, may know a great deal; but you are always eage r, always wanting, 
and therefore are gullible. 
So a mind that is enquiring into the question of what is religion, must be 
entirely free of any form of belief, any form of fear; because fear, as we 
explained the other day, is a distor ting factor, bringing about violence and 
aggression. Therefore the mind that is en quiring into th e quality of the religious 
state and movement, must be free of this . That demands great honesty and a great 
sense of humility. 
For most of us, vanity is one of the major impediments. Because we think we 
know, because we have read a great deal , because we have committed ourselves, 
have practised this or that system, fo llowed some guru peddling his philosophy, 
we think we know, at least a little bit, a nd that’s the beginnin g of vanity. When 
you are enquiring into  such an extraordin ary question, there must be the freedom 
of actually not knowing a thing about it. You really  don’t know, do you? You 
don’t know what truth is, what God is—i f there is such a th ing—or what is a 
truly religious mind. You ha ve read about it, people have talked about it for 
millennia, have built monasteries, but ac tually they are liv ing on othe r people’s 
knowledge, experience and propaganda. To find out, surely one must put aside 
all that completely, and therefore the enquiry into all this is a very serious matter. 
If you want to play with it,  there are all kinds of so-called spiritual, religious 
entertainments, but they have no value whatsoever to a serious mind. 
To enquire into what is a religious mind, we must be free of our conditioning, 
of our Christianity, of our  Buddhism, with all the pr opaganda of thousands of 
years, so that the mind is really free to  observe. That is very difficult because we 
are afraid to be alone, to stand alone. We want security, both outwardly and 
inwardly; therefore we depend on people, wh ether it is the priest, or the leader, or 
the guru who says: “I have  experienced, that is why I know.” One has to stand 
completely alone—not isolated. There is a vast difference between isolation and 
being completely alone, integral. Isolation is a state of  mind in which relationship 
ceases, when in your daily life and activity  you have actually built a wall around 
yourself, consciously or unconsciously, so  as not to be hurt. That isolation 
obviously prevents every form of rela tionship. Aloneness implies a mind that 
does not depend on another psychologically , is not attached to  any person; which 
does not mean that there is no love—love is not attachment. Aloneness implies a 
mind that is deeply, inwardly  without any sense of fear  and therefore without any 
sense of conflict. 
If you go as far as that, then we ca n proceed to find out what discipline 
means. For most of us discipline is a form of drill, of repetition; either 
overcoming an obstacle, or resisting or suppressing, controlling, shaping, 
conforming—all that is implied in the word  discipline. The root  meaning of that 
word is to learn; a mind that is w illing to learn—not to conform—must be 
curious, must have great interest, and a mind that already knows, cannot possibly learn. So discipline means to learn wh y one controls, why one suppresses, why 
there is fear, why one conforms, compares, and is therefore in conflict. That very 
learning brings about order; not order acc ording to a design or pattern, but in the 
very enquiry into the confusion, into the disorder, there is order. Most of us are 
confused for a dozen reasons, which we needn’t go into for the moment. One has 
to learn about confusion, about the disorder ly life one leads; not try to bring order 
into the confusion, or into  the disorder, but to learn about it. Then, as you are 
learning, order comes into being. 
Order is a living thing, not mechanical, and order surely is virtue. A mind that 
is confused, conforming, imitating, is not  orderly—it is in conflict. And a mind 
that is in conflict is disorderly and therefore such a mind has no virtue. Out of 
this enquiry, out of learning, comes order, and order is virtue. Please observe it in 
yourself, see how disordered one is in one ’s life, so confused , so mechanical. In 
that state one tries to find a moral way of  living, which will be  orderly and sane. 
How can a mind that is confused, conformi ng, imitative, have any kind of order, 
any kind of virtue? The so cial morality, as you observe , is totally immoral; it 
may be respectable, but what is re spectable is generally disorderly. 
Order is necessary, because only out of order can there be a total action and 
action is life. But our acti on brings disorder; there is  political action, religious 
action, business action, family acti on—they are fragmentary actions. And 
naturally such action is contradictory. You are a businessman and at home you 
are a kindly human being—at least you pret end to be; there is contradiction and 
therefore there is disorder. A mind that is in disorder cann ot possibly understand 
what virtue is. And nowadays,  when there is permissiveness of every kind, virtue 
and order are denied. The re ligious mind must have this order, not according to a 
pattern, or a design laid down by you or by  another. But that order, that sense of 
moral rectitude, comes only when you under stand the disorder, the confusion, the 
mess that one lives in. 
Now all this is to lay the foundation for meditation. If you don’t lay the 
foundations, meditation then becomes an es cape. You can play with that kind of 
meditation endlessly. And that is what most people are doing—leading ordinary, 
confused, messy lives and somehow finding a corner to bring about a quiet mind. 
And there are all these people who promis e to give you a qu iet mind, whatever 
that may mean. 
So for a serious mind—and it is a very  serious thing, not a game—one must 
have this freedom from all belief, from all commitments, because one is 
committed to the whole of life, not to one fragment of it. Most of us are 
committed to physical or political revolutio n, or to a religious activity, to some 
kind of religious, monastic life a nd so on. Those are all fragmentary 
commitments. We are talking of freedom , so that you can commit your whole 
being, your whole energy, vita lity and passion to the whole of life, not to one part 
of it. Then we can proceed to fi nd out what it means to meditate. 
I don’t know if you have gone into this at all. Probably some of you have 
played with it, have tried to control your thoughts, followed various systems, but 
that is not meditation. One has to dispos e of the systems one has been offered: 
Zen, Transcendental Meditation, the various things that have been brought over from India and Asia, in whic h people are caught. One has to go into this question 
of systems, of methods, and I hope you will; we are sharing this problem 
together. 
When you have a system to follow, what happens to the mind? What do 
systems and methods imply—a guru? I don’t know why they  call themselves 
gurus—I can’t find a strong enough word to deny that whole world of gurus, of 
their authority, because they  think they know. A man wh o says “I know”, such a 
man does not know. Or if a man says, “I have experienced truth”, distrust him 
completely. These are the pe ople who offer systems. A system implies practice, 
following, repetition, changing “what actu ally is” and therefore increasing your 
conflict. Systems make the mind mechani cal, they don’t give you freedom, they 
may promise freedom at the end, but freedom  is at the beginning, not at the end. 
To enquire into the truth of any system, if you have no freedom at the beginning, 
then you are bound to end up with a system and therefore with a mind which is 
incapable of subtlety, swif tness and sensitivity. So one can dispose entirely of all 
systems. 
What is important is not controlli ng thought, but understanding it, 
understanding the origin, the beginning of th ought, which is in yourself. That is, 
the brain stores up memori es—you can observe this yo urself, you don’t have to 
read books about it. If it had not stored up memories it wo uld not be able to think 
at all. That memory is th e result of experience, of knowledge—yours, or of the 
community, of the family, of the race and so on. Thought springs from that 
storehouse of memory. So thought is never free, it is always old, there is no such thing as freedom of thought.  Thought can never be free in  itself, it can talk about 
freedom, but in itself it is the result of past memories, experiences and knowledge; therefore it is old. Yet one must have this  accumulation of 
knowledge, otherwise one could not func tion, one could not speak to another, 
could not go home, and so on. Knowledge is essential. 
In meditation one has to fi nd out whether there is an  end to knowledge and so 
to freedom from the known. If meditation is a continuation of knowledge, is the continuation of everything that man has accumulated, then there is no freedom. 
There is freedom only when there is an understanding of the function of knowledge and therefore freedom from the known. 
We are enquiring into the field of kn owledge, where it has its function and 
where it becomes an impediment to fu rther enquiry. While the brain cells 
continue to operate, they can only operate in  the field of knowl edge. That is the 
only thing the brain can do, to function in  the field of experience, of knowledge 
in the field of time—which is the past. Med itation is to find out if there is a field 
which is not already contaminated by the known. 
If I meditate and continue with what I ha ve already learnt, with what I already 
know, then I am living in the past, within the field of  my conditioning. In that 
there is no freedom. I may decorate the pr ison in which I live,  I may do all kinds 
of things in that prison, but there is s till a limitation, a barrier. So the mind has to 
find out whether the brain ce lls, which have developed through millennia, can be 
totally quiet, and respond to a dimensi on they do not know . Which means, can 
the mind be totally still? This has been the problem of all religi ous people throughout the centuries; 
they realize that you must have a very quiet mind, beca use then only can you see. 
If you are chattering, if your mind is c onstantly in movement, rushing all over the 
place, obviously it cannot lo ok, it cannot listen totally. So they say, “Control it, 
hold it, put it in a prison”; they have no t found a way of bri nging about a mind 
that is completely and utterly quiet. Th ey say, “Don’t yield to any desire, don’t 
look at a woman, don’t look  at the beautiful hills, the trees and the beauty of the 
earth, because if you do, it might remind you of a woman, or a man. Therefore 
control, hold on, and concentrate.” When you do all that, you are in conflict, and 
therefore there has to be more control, more subjugation. This has been going on 
for millennia, because they realize they must have a quiet mind. Now, how does 
the mind become quiet?—without effort , without control, without giving it a 
frontier? The moment you ask “how” yo u are introducing a system. Therefore 
there is no “how”. 
Can the mind become quiet? I don’t know  what you are going to do about it 
when you see the problem, when you see the necessity, the truth of having this 
delicate, subtle mind, which is absolutely  quiet. How is it to happen? This is the 
problem of meditation, because only such a mind is a religious mind. It is only 
such a mind that sees the whole of life as a unit, as a unitary movement, not 
fragmented. Therefore such a mind acts totally, not fragmentar ily, because it acts 
out of complete stillness. 
The foundation is a life of complete re lationship, a life that is orderly and 
therefore virtuous, a life that is extraord inarily simple inwardly, and therefore 
totally austere—the austerity  of deep simplicity, whic h means that the mind is 
not in conflict. When you have laid that  foundation, easily, without any effort—
because the moment you introduce effort th ere is conflict—you see the truth of it. 
Therefore it is the perception of “what is” that brings about a radical change. 
It is only the still mind that understa nds that in a quiet mind there is a 
movement that is totally different, that is  of a different dimens ion, of a different 
quality. That can never be pu t into words, because it is indescribable. What can 
be described is what comes up to this point, the point when you have laid the 
foundation and seen the necessity, the tr uth, and the beauty of a still mind. 
For most of us, beauty is in something , in a building, in a cloud, in the shape 
of a tree, in a beautiful face.  Is beauty “out there”, or is it a quality of mind that 
has no self-centred activity? Because like joy, the understanding of beauty is 
essential in meditation. Beauty is really  the total abandonmen t of the “me”, and 
the eyes that have abandoned  the “me” can see the trees, the beauty of it all, and 
the loveliness of the cloud; that happens when there is no centre as the “me”. It 
happens to each one of us, doesn’t it?—w hen you see a lovely mountain, when 
you come upon it suddenly, there it is! Everything has been pushed aside except 
the majesty of that hill. That mountai n, that tree, absorbs you completely. 
It is like a child with a toy—the toy ab sorbs the child , and when the toy is 
destroyed the child is back again in whatever he is doi ng, in his mischief, in his 
crying. Likewise with us: when you se e the mountain, or the single tree on a 
hilltop, it absorbs you. And we want to be absorbed by someth ing, by an idea, by an activity, by a commitment, by a belief, or we want to be absorbed by another; 
which is like the child with a toy. 
So beauty means sensitivity—a body that is sens itive, which means the right 
diet, the right way of living,  and you have all this, if you have gone that far. I 
hope you will, or are doing it now; then  the mind will inevitably and naturally, 
unknowingly, become quiet. You can’ t make the mind quiet, because you  are the 
mischief-maker, you are yourself distur bed, anxious, confused—how can you 
make the mind quiet? But when you unde rstand what quietness is, when you 
understand what confusion is , what sorrow is and whether sorrow can ever end, 
and when you understand pleasure, then out of that comes an extraordinarily 
quiet mind; you don’t have to seek it. You must begin at the beginning and the 
first step is the last step , and this is meditation. 
 
Questioner: When you make th e analogy of the mountain , the hills, the beautiful 
sky—that’s wrong for these people, that’s  not the analogy for them—the analogy 
is the dirt. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Right, take that—the analogy of  the dirty streets of New York, 
the analogy of squalor, poverty, the ghetto s, the wars to which each one of us has 
contributed. You don’t feel that way,  because you have separated yourself, 
isolated yourself; therefore, having no  relationship with another, you become 
corrupt and allow corruption to  spread in the world. Th at’s why this corruption, 
this pollution, these wars, this hatred , cannot be stopped by a political or 
religious system, or by any organization. You have to change. Don’t you see this? 
You have to cease completely to be wh at you are. Not through will—meditation 
is the emptying of the mind of will; th en a totally different action takes place. 
 
Questioner: If one can have the privilege of becoming totally aware, how can we 
then help those who are conditioned, who have a deep resentment in them? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Why, if I may ask, do you use the word privilege? What is there 
sacred or privileged about being aware? Th at’s a natural thing, isn’t it, to be 
aware? If you are aware of yo ur own conditioning, of the turmoil, the dirt, the 
squalor, the war, the hatred, if you are aware of all that, you will establish a 
relationship with another so complete, that you are related to every other human 
being in the world. You un derstand this? If I am relate d to somebody completely, 
totally—not as an idea or an image—then  I am related to ev ery human being in 
the world. Then I will see I will not hurt another—th ey are hurting themselves. 
Then go, preach, talk abou t it—not with the desire to help another, you 
understand?—that’s the most terrible thing to say, “I want to help another”. Who 
are you to help another?—including the speaker. 
Sir, look, the beauty of the tree or the flower doesn’t want to help you, it is 
there; it is for you to look at the squalor or at the beauty, and if you are incapable 
of looking at it, then find out why you ha ve become so indifferent, so callous, so 
shallow and empty. If you find out that, then you are in a state where the waters of life flow, you don’t have to do anything. Questioner: What is the relationship betw een seeing things exactly as they are 
and consciousness? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You only know consciousness by its  content, and its content is 
what is happening in the world, of which you are a part. To empty all that is not 
to have no consciousness, but a totally different dimension. You cannot speculate 
about that dimension—leave th at to the scientists, to the philosophers. What we 
can do is to find out wh ether it is possible to uncondition the mind by becoming 
aware, by becoming totally attentive. 
 
Questioner: I don’t know myself what love is  or what truth is, or what God is, but 
you describe it as, “Love is God”, inst ead of “Love is love”. Can you explain 
why you say “Love is God”? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I didn’t say love is God. 
 
Questioner: I read one  of your books... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I’m sorry, don’t read books! ( Laughter ) That word has been 
used so much, is so loaded  by man’s despairs and hope s. You have your God, the 
Communists have their gods. So find out, if I may suggest, what love is. You can 
only find out what love is , by knowing what it is not. Not knowing intellectually, 
but actually in life putting as ide what it is not—jealous y, ambition and greed, all 
the division that goes on in life, the me and the you,  we and they, the black and 
the white. Unfortunately you won’t do it because it needs energy, and energy 
comes only when you observe actually what  is and don’t run away from it. When 
you see actually what is, then in the obs erving of it, you have the energy to go 
beyond it. You cannot go beyond it if you  are trying to escape from it, to 
translate it, or to overcome  it. Just observe actually  what is, then you have 
abundance of energy, then yo u can find out what love is. Love is not pleasure, 
and to really find that out , inwardly, for yourself, do you  know what that means? 
It means that there is no fear, that th ere is no attachment, no dependency, but a 
relationship in which there is no division. 
 
Questioner: Could you talk about the role of the artist in society—does he serve 
a function beyond his own? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Who is an artist? Someone who paints a picture, writes a poem, 
who wants to express himself through pa inting or through writing a book or a 
play? Why do we divide th e artist from the rest of us ?—or the intellectual from 
the rest of us? We have placed the intellect ual at one level, the artist perhaps at a 
higher level, and the scientist at a still higher level. And then we say, “What is 
their role in society?” Th e question is not, what is their role, but what is your role 
in society; because you have created this mess. What is your role? Find out, Sir. 
That is, find out why you live within this  world of squalor, hatred and misery; 
apparently it does not touch you. Look, you have listened to these talks, shared some of th e things together, 
understood, let’s hope, a great deal. Then you become a centre of right 
relationship and therefore it is your responsibility to change this terrible, corrupt, destructive society. 
 
Questioner: Sir, could you go into psychological time? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Time is old age, time is sorro w, time doesn’t heed. There is 
chronological time by the watch. That must  exist, otherwise you won’t be able to 
catch your bus, cook a meal, and all the re st of it. But there is another kind of 
time, which we have accep ted. That is, “Tomorrow I will be, tomorrow I will 
change, tomorrow I will become”; psyc hologically we have  created time—
tomorrow. Is there a tomorrow, psychol ogically? That questio n fills us with 
dread to ask seriously. Because we want  tomorrow: “I shall have the pleasure of 
meeting you tomorrow, I am going to understand tomorrow, my life will be different tomorrow, I will realize enlight enment tomorrow.” Therefore tomorrow 
becomes the most important th ing in our life. You have had sex yesterday, all the 
pleasures, all the agonies—whatever it is—and you want it tomorrow, because you want that same pleasure repeated. 
Put that question to yourself and find out the truth of it. “Is there a tomorrow 
at all?”—except in thought which projects tomorrow. So tomorrow is the invention of thought as time, and if th ere is no tomorrow psychologically, what 
happens in life today? Then there is a tremendous revolution, isn’t there? Then 
your whole action undergoes a radica l change, doesn’t it? Then you are 
completely whole now, not projecting from the past, through the present, into the future. 
That means to live, dying every day.  Do it, and you will find out what it 
means to live completely toda y. Isn’t that what love is? You don’t say, “I will 
love tomorrow”, do you? Y ou love or you don’t love . Love has no time, only 
sorrow has time—sorrow being thought, as in  pleasure. So one ha s to find out for 
oneself what time is, and find out if there is  a “no tomorrow”. That  is to live, then 
there is a life which is eternal, because eternity has no time. 
 
NEW YORK CITY 
25 APRIL 1971  
 
 
 
 
 
 
AMERICA  
 
III 
 
Two Conversations: 
J. Krishnamurti and Alain Naudé 
 
 
1  The circus of man’s struggle 
2  On good and evil 1 
 
 
THE CIRCUS OF MAN’S STRUGGLE  
 
 
Conversation between J. Krishnamurti 
and Alain Naudé 
 
 
Naudé:1 You speak about the whole of life. Wh en we look about us there is so 
much disorder everywhere; it seems that people are so confused. In the world we 
see that there is war, ecological disorde r, political and social disorder, crime, and 
all the evils of industrialization and ov erpopulation. And it seems that the more 
people try to solve these problems the more they au gment. Then there is man 
himself, who is full of problems. He has not only the problems of the world about 
him, but is full of proble ms inwardly—loneliness, despair, jealousy, anger—all 
this we may call confusion. And presently he dies. Now we have always been 
told that there is somethin g else, which has variously been called God, eternity, 
creation. And about this man knows nothi ng. He has tried to live for this, in 
relation to this; but it has again made problems. It seems from what you have 
said so many times that one must find a wa y of dealing with these three sets of 
problems, these three aspects of life at  the same time, because these are the 
problems confronting man. Is there a way to ask the question properly so that it 
will answer these three sets of  problems at the same time? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : First of all, Sir, wh y do we make this division? Or is there only 
one movement which must be taken on the wave itself? So first let’s find out why we have divided this whole existence in to the world outside of me, the world 
inside of me, and something beyond me. Does this division exist because of the 
chaos outwardly and are we only concerned with the outer chaos, and totally 
neglect the inner chaos? Not finding a solution for the outer, or for the inner, we then try to find a solution in a belief, in the divine? 
 
Naudé: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So in asking a question of this  kind, are we dealing with the 
three things separately, or as a total movement? 
 
Naudé: How can we make them into a unita ry movement? How are they related? 
What is the action in man wh ich will make them the same? 
 
                                                 
1 Alain Naudé, musician, for six years closely associated with Krishnamurti as his secretary and assistant, 
and (as he says) above all as his stude nt. At present living in the U.S.A. KRISHNAMURTI : I wouldn’t come to that yet. I would ask: why has man divided 
the world, his whole existence, into these three categories? Why?—and from 
there move. Now why have I, as a human be ing, divided the world outside of me 
from the world inside me, and from the world which I am trying to grasp—of 
which I know nothing—and to which I give all my despairing hope? 
 
Naudé: Right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now why do I do this? Tentativel y we are asking: is it that we 
have not been able to solve the outer with its ch aos, confusion, destruction, 
brutality, violence and all the horrors that  are going on, and therefore we turn to 
the inner and hope thereby to  solve the outer? And not being able to solve the 
inner chaos, the inner insu fficiency, the inner brutality, violence and all the rest 
of it, not being able to solve anything ther e either, then we m ove away from both, 
the outer and the inner, to some other dimension? 
 
Naudé: Yes, it is like that. That is what we do. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is what is happening a ll the time around us and in us. 
 
Naudé: Yes. There are the problems outside which engender the problems inside. Not being able to deal with either, or both, we create the hope of some other, 
some third state, which we call God. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, an ou tside agency. 
 
Naudé: An outside agency which will be the consolation, th e final solution. But it 
is also a fact that there are things which are really outer problems: the roof leaks, 
the sky is full of pollution, the rivers ar e drying up, there are such problems. And 
there are wars—they are visible outer pr oblems. There are also problems which 
we think to be inner problems, our secret and closed longings , fears and worries. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. 
 
Naudé: There is the world, and there is ma n’s reaction to it, man’s living in it. 
And so there are these two entities—at least in a practical sort of way we can say 
there are. And so probably  the trying to solve practical problems overflows into 
the inner state of man and engenders problems there. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That means we are still keepin g the outer and the inner as two 
separate movements. 
 
Naudé: Yes, we are. We do. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And I feel that is a totally wr ong approach. The roof does leak 
and the world is overpopulated, there is pollution, there are wars, there is every kind of mischief going on. And not being ab le to solve that we  turn inward; not 
being able to solve the inward issues we  turn to something outer, still further 
away from all this. Whereas if we could treat the whole of this existence as one 
unitary movement, then perhaps we woul d be able to solve all these problems 
intelligently and reas onably and in order. 
 
Naudé: Yes. It seems that is what you speak about. Would you mind telling us 
how these three problems are really one thing? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am coming to that, I am coming to it. The world outside of me 
is created by me—not the trees, not the clouds, the bees and the beauty of the 
landscape—but human existence in rela tionship, which is called society, that is 
created by you and by me. So the world is me  and I am the world. I think that is 
the first thing that must be established: no t as an intellectual or an abstract fact, 
but in actual feeling, in actual realization.  This is a fact, not a supposition, not an 
intellectual concept, but it is a fact that the world is me and I am the world. The 
world being the society in which I live, with its culture, morality, inequality, all 
the chaos that is going  on in society, that is myself  in action. And the culture is 
what I have created and what I am caught in . I think that is an irrevocable and an 
absolute fact. 
 
Naudé: Yes. How is it that pe ople don’t see this enough?  We have politicians, we 
have ecologists, we have economists, we  have soldiers all trying to solve the 
outside problems simply as outer problems. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Probably because of a lack of  the right kind of education: 
specialization, the desire to conquer and go to the moon and play golf there, and 
so on and so on! We always want to alte r the outer hoping thereby to change the 
inner. “Create the right environment”—t he communists have said it a hundred 
times—“then the human mind will change according to that.” 
 
Naudé: That is what they say. In fact, every great univers ity, with all its 
departments, with all its specialists, one could almost say that these great 
universities are founded and bu ilt on the belief that the world can be changed by 
a certain amount of specialized know ledge in different departments. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. I think we miss this basic thing, which is: the world is me 
and I am the world. I think that feeling,  not as an idea, that feeling brings a 
totally different way of look ing at this whole problem. 
 
Naudé: It is an enormous revolution. To see the problem as one problem, the 
problem of man and not the problem of hi s environment, that is an enormous 
step, which people will not take. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : People won’t take any step. Th ey are used to this outward 
organization and disregard totally what is happening inward ly. So when one realizes that the world is me and I am th e world, then my action is not separative, 
is not the individual opposed to th e community; nor the importance of the 
individual and his salvation. When one rea lizes that the world is me and I am the 
world, then whatever action takes place, whatever change takes place, that will 
change the whole of the consciousness of man. 
 
Naudé: Would you like to explain that? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I, as a human being, realize th at the world is me and I am the 
world: realize, feel deeply committed, am passionately aware of this fact. 
 
Naudé: Yes, that my action is in fact the world; my behaviour is the only world 
there is, because the events in the wo rld are behaviour. And behaviour is the 
inner. So the inner and the outer are one be cause the events of history, the events 
of life, are in fact this point of contact between the inner and the outer. It is in 
fact the behaviour of man. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So the consciousness of the world is my consciousness. 
 
Naudé: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : My consciousness is the world. Now the crisis is in this 
consciousness, not in organization, not in bettering the road s—tearing down the 
hills to build more roads. 
 
Naudé: Bigger tanks, intercontinental missiles. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : My consciousness is the world and the consciousness of the 
world is me. When there is a change in  this consciousness it affects the whole 
consciousness of the world. I don’t know if you see that? 
 
Naudé: It is an extraordinary fact. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is a fact. 
 
Naudé: It is consciousness that is in disord er; there is no disorder anywhere else. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Obviously! 
 
Naudé: Therefore the ills of the world are the ills of human consciousness, and 
the ills of human consciousness are my ills, my malady,  my disorder. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now when I realize th at my consciousness is the consciousness 
of the world, and the consciousness of the world is me, whatever change that 
takes place in me affects th e whole of consciousness. 
 Naudé: To this people always say: that’s all very well, I may change, but there 
will still be a war in Indo-China! 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Quite right, there will be. 
 
Naudé: And ghettos and overpopulation. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course, there will be. But if each one of us saw the truth of 
this, that the consciousness of  the world is mine, and mine  is the world’s; and if 
each one of us felt the responsibility of that—the politician, the scientist, the 
engineer, the bureaucrat, the businessm an—if everybody felt that, what then? 
And it is our job to make them feel this; that is the function of  the religious man, 
surely? 
 
Naudé: This is an enormous thing. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait, let me go on. So then it is one movement. It is not an 
individual movement and his sa lvation. It is the salvati on, if you like to use that 
word, of the whole of man’s consciousness. 
 
Naudé: The wholeness, and the health of consciousness itself, which is one thing 
and in which is contained what appears to be the outer, and what appears to be the inner. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s right. Let’s keep to that one point. 
 
Naudé: So what you are speaking about is in fact that health, that sanity, and that wholeness of consciousness, which always has been in fact an indivisible entity. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, that’s right. Now when th e people who want to create a 
different kind of world, the educators, the writers, the organizers, when they 
realize the world as it is now is thei r responsibility, then the whole of the 
consciousness of man begins to change. Which is what is happening in another 
direction, only they are emphasizing or ganization, division; they are doing 
exactly the same thing. 
 
Naudé: In a negative way. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : In a destructive way. So from that the question arises: can this 
human consciousness, which is me—whi ch is the community, which is the 
society, which is the culture, which is a ll the horrors that ar e produced by me in 
the context of the society, in the culture which is me—can this consciousness 
undergo a radical change? That is the qu estion. Not escape into the supposed 
divine, not escape. Because when we understand this ch ange in consciousness the 
divine is there, you do n’t have to seek it. 
 Naudé: Would you please explain what this change in consciousness consists of? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s what we are goi ng to talk about now. 
 
Naudé: And then perhaps we can ask about the divine if it arises. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : (Pause) First of all, is there a ny possibility of a change in 
consciousness? Or is any change made consciously no change at all? To talk 
about a change in consciousness imp lies changing from this to that. 
 
Naudé: And both this and that are within consciousness. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is what I want to establis h first. That when we say there 
must be a change in consciousness, it is still within the field of consciousness. 
 
Naudé: The way we see the trouble, and th e way we see the solution, which we 
call change—that is all within the same area. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : All within the same ar ea and therefore no change at all. That is, 
the content of consciousness is consciou sness and the two are not separate. Let’s 
be clear on that point too. Consciousness is made up of all th e things that have 
been collected by man as experience, as knowledge, as misery, confusion, 
destruction, violence—all that is consciousness. 
 
Naudé: Plus so-called solutions. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : God, no-God, various theori es about God, all that is 
consciousness. When we talk about change in consciousness we are still 
changing the pieces from one corner to the other. 
 
Naudé: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Moving one quality into another corner of the field. 
 
Naudé: Juggling with the conten ts of this huge box. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, juggling with the contents. And therefore... 
 
Naudé: We are changing variables in the same set of things. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s right. You have put it pe rfectly, better than I have. When 
we talk about changing, we are really thinking of juggling with the contents—
right? Now that implies a juggler and the th ing with which he is  juggling. But it 
is still within the field of consciousness. 
 Naudé: There are two questions which arise.  Are you saying that there is no 
consciousness at all outside of the cont ent of consciousness? And secondly, that 
there is no entity at all to  juggle, there is no entity ca lled ‘me’ outside of this 
content of consciousness? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Obviously not. 
 
Naudé: These are two big statements, Sir. Wo uld you be kind enough to explain 
them? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What is the first question? 
 
Naudé: The first thing you are saying, if I ha ve understood correctly, is: that this 
consciousness which we are discussing, wh ich is all we are and all we have, and 
which we have seen is the problem itsel f, you are saying that this consciousness 
is its very content, and that there is nothing to be called consciousness outside of 
the content of consciousness? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Absolutely right. 
 
Naudé: Are you saying, outside of man’s problems, outside of his misery, outside 
of his thinking, outside of the formulations  of his mind, there is nothing at all we 
call consciousness? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Absolutely right. 
 
Naudé: This is a big statement. Would you explain this? We all think—and this 
has been postulated by Indi an religions since the beginn ing of time—that there is 
a super-consciousness outside of this sh ell which is the consciousness we are 
talking about. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : To find out if there is somethi ng beyond this consciousness, I 
must understand the content of this consciousness. The mind must go beyond 
itself. Then I shall find out if there is so mething other than th is or not. But to 
stipulate that there is has no meaning, it is just a speculation. 
 
Naudé: So are you saying that what we commonly call consciousness, and what 
we are talking about, is the very content of this consciousness? The container and 
contained are an indivisible thing? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s right. 
 
Naudé: And the second point you are making is : that there is no entity to decide, 
to will, and to juggle, when the contents to be juggled are absent. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : That is, my consciousness is th e consciousness of the world, and 
the consciousness of the world is me. This  is a truth, not just my invention or 
dependent on your acceptance. It is an absolute truth. Also the content is 
consciousness: without th e content there is no consciousness. Now when we 
want to change the co ntent we are juggling. 
 
Naudé: The content is juggling itself, because you have a third poin t, that there is 
nobody outside of this conten t to do any juggling at all. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Quite right. 
 
Naudé: So the juggler and the content are one, and the container and the content 
are one. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The thinker who within this c onsciousness says that he must 
change, is consciousness trying to chan ge. I think that is fairly clear. 
 
Naudé: So that the world, the consciousne ss and the entity who supposedly will 
change it, are all the same entity, mas querading, as it were in three different 
roles. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : If that is so, then what is a hu man being to do to bring about a 
total emptying of the content of c onsciousness? How is this particular 
consciousness, which is me and the world with all its miseries, how is that to 
undergo complete change? How is the mind— which is consciousness, with all its 
content, with the accumulate d knowledge of the past—how is that mind to empty 
itself of all its content? 
 
Naudé: But people will say, hearing what you have said, understanding it 
imperfectly, they will say: can that cons ciousness be emptied, and when that 
consciousness is emptied, supposing this  were possible, doesn’t that reduce one 
to a state of considerable vagueness and inertia? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : On the contrary. To have come to  this point requires a great deal 
of enquiry, a great deal of reason, logic, and with it comes intelligence. 
 
Naudé: Because some people may think that  the empty consciousness, which you 
speak about, is somethi ng like the consciousness of the child at birth. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, Sir, not at all. Let’s go slowly at this, step by step. Let’s 
begin again. My consciousness is the c onsciousness of the world. The world is 
me and the content of my consciousness is the content of the world. The content 
of consciousness is consciousness itself. 
 
Naudé: And also that is the entity who says he is conscious. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Now I am asking myself, realizing I am that, what is then 
changed? 
 
Naudé: What is changed which will solve these three sets  of problems that are 
really one? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What is implied by change? Wh at is implied by revolution?—
not physical revolution. 
 
Naudé: We have gone beyond that. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Physical revolution is the most  absurd, primitive, unintelligent 
destruction. 
 
Naudé: It is fragmentation in this consciousness. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. 
 
Naudé: Are you asking what it is whic h will restore order to this 
consciousness?—an order which is whole. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Can there be order within this consciousness? 
 
Naudé: Is that the next step? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is what you are asking. 
 
Naudé: Yes. Since we see that the diso rder, which is the sorrow and the 
suffering, is the disorder in this indivi sible consciousness, the next question must 
be: what are we going to do about it? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. 
 
Naudé: And since there is no entity who can do something about it... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait, don’t jump to that immediately. 
 
Naudé: Because we have seen that  the disorder is the entity. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do we realize that? No. Do we re alize that the thinker is part of 
this consciousness and is not a separate entity outside this consciousness? Do we 
realize that the observer, seeing the content, examining, analysing, looking at it all, is the content itself? That the observer is the content? 
 
Naudé: Yes. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : But stating a truth is one thing,  the realization of it is another. 
 
Naudé: That’s right. I think we  do not fully u nderstand that there is no entity 
separate from this thing we are trying to change. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : When we talk of change it seems to imply that there is an entity 
separate within the consciousness, wh o can bring about a transformation. 
 
Naudé: We think that somehow we can step aside from th e mess and look at it 
and juggle with it. We always tell ourselves, “Well, I’m still here to do 
something about it.” And so we juggle more and more. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : More mess, more confusion. 
 
Naudé: A change of decor a nd things get worse. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The consciousness of the world is my consciousness. In that 
consciousness is all the content of human endeavour, human misery, human 
cruelty, mischief, all human activities are w ithin that consciousn ess. Within that 
consciousness man has brought about this entity which says, “I am separate from 
my consciousness.” The observer there sa ys, “I am different from the thing 
observed.” The thinker says, “My thoughts are different from me.” First, is that so? 
 
Naudé: We all believe that the two entities ar e different. We say to ourselves, “I 
must not be angry, I must not be so rrowful, I must improve, I must change 
myself.” We are saying this either tacitly or consciously all the time. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Because we think these two are separate. Now we are trying to 
point out that they are not separate, that they are one, because if there is no 
thought at all there is no thinker. 
 
Naudé: That is right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : If there is nothing observed there is no observer. 
 
Naudé: There are a hundred observers and a hundred thinkers during the course of the day. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am just saying: is that so? I observe that red-tailed hawk flying 
by. I see it. When I observe that bird, am I observing with th e image I have about 
that bird, or am I merely observing? Is th ere only mere observation? If there is an 
image, which is words, memory and all th e rest of it, then there is an observer 
watching the bird go by. If there is only observation, then there is no observer. 
 Naudé: Would you explain why there is an obse rver when I look at the bird with 
an image? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Because the observer is the past . The observer is the censor, is 
the accumulated knowledge, experience, memory; that is the observer, with that 
he observes the world. His accumula ted knowledge is different from your 
accumulated knowledge. 
 
Naudé: Are you saying that this total consci ousness, which is the problem, is not 
different from the observer who is going to deal with it, and this would seem to 
bring us to a deadlock, because the thing we are trying to change is the person 
trying to change it? And the question is: what then? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is just it. If th e observer is the observed, what is the nature 
of change in consciousness? That is what we are trying to find out. We realize that there must be a radical revolution in  consciousness. How is this to take 
place? Is it to take place through the ob server? When the observer is separate 
from the observed, then this change is merely j uggling with the various contents 
of consciousness. 
 
Naudé: That’s right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now let’s go slowly. One realiz es that the observer is the 
observed, the thinker is the thought, th at is a fact. Let’s stop there a minute. 
 
Naudé: Are you saying that the thinker is the totality of all these thoughts which 
create the confusion? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The thinker is the thought, whether it is many, or one. 
 
Naudé: But there is a difference, because th e thinker thinks of himself as some 
sort of crystallized concrete entity. Even through this discussion, the thinker sees 
himself as the concrete en tity to whom all these thou ghts, all this confusion 
belongs. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That concrete entity, as you sa y, is the result of thought. 
 
Naudé: That concrete entity is... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : ...put together by thought. 
 
Naudé: Put together by his thoughts. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : By thought, not “his”, by thought. 
 
Naudé: Yes. KRISHNAMURTI : And thought sees that  there must be a change. This concrete 
entity, which is the result of though t, hopes to change the content. 
 
Naudé: Itself. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And so there is a battle betwee n the observer and the observed. 
The battle consists of trying to control,  change, shape, suppress, give a new 
shape, all that, that is the battle that go es on all the time in ou r life. But when the 
mind understands the truth that the observ er, the experiencer, the thinker, is the 
thought, is the experience, is the observe d, then what takes place?—knowing that 
there must be a radical change. 
 
Naudé: That is a fact. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And when the observer, who wants to change, realizes he is part 
of what has to be changed? 
 
Naudé: That he is in fact a thief pretending  to be a policeman to catch himself. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Right. So what takes place? 
 
Naudé: You see, Sir, people don’t believe this; they say, “By exercising will I 
have stopped smoking, by exercising will I have got up earlier, I have lost weight 
and I have learnt languages”; they say, “I  am the master of my destiny, I can 
change”—everybody really be lieves this. Everybody belie ves that he is capable 
somehow of exercising will upon his own life, upon his own behaviour, and his 
own thinking. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Which means, one has to unde rstand the meaning of effort. 
What it is, why effort exists at all. Is that the way to bring about a transformation 
in consciousness? Through effort, through will? 
 
Naudé: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Which means what? Change throu gh conflict. When there is the 
operation of will, it is a form of resistance ; to overcome, to su ppress, to deny, to 
escape—all that is will in action. That means life is then a constant battle. 
 
Naudé: Are you saying that simply one element in this consciousness is 
dominating another? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Obviously. One fragment dominates another fragment. 
 
Naudé: And that there is still conflict? There is still disorder by that very fact. 
Yes, this is clear. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : So, the central fact still rema ins. There must be a radical 
transformation in consciousne ss and of consciousness. No w, how is this to be 
brought about? That is the real question. 
 
Naudé: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We have approached it by thinki ng that one fragment is superior 
to the rest, to the other fragments within the field of consciousness. 
 
Naudé: Indeed we have. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now that fragment which we call superior, intelligence, 
intellect, reason, logic, is the product of the many other fragments. One fragment 
has assumed authority ove r other fragments. But it is still a fragment and 
therefore there is a battle between it and the many other fragments. So is it 
possible to see that this fragmen tation does not solve our problems? 
 
Naudé: Because it causes the division and the conflict, which right from the start 
was our problem. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is, when there is division  between man and woman there is 
conflict. When there is a division betwee n Germany and England or Russia, there 
is conflict. 
 
Naudé: And all this is division within consciousness itself. Also, the exercise of will upon consciousness is again a division w ithin consciousness. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So one has to be free of the idea that through will you can 
change the content. That is  important to understand. 
 
Naudé: Yes, that the exercise of will is simply the tyranny of  one fragment over 
another. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s simple. One also realizes that to be free of will is to be 
free of this fragmentation. 
 
Naudé: But religions in the wo rld have always called u pon will to come in and 
do something. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. But we are denying the whole of that. 
 
Naudé: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So what is a mind to do, or not to do, when it sees will is not the 
way, when it sees that one fragment taki ng charge over anothe r fragment is still fragmentation and therefore conflict?—a nd therefore still within the field of 
misery. Then what is  such a mind to do? 
 
Naudé: Yes, this is really the question. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now, for such a mind is there anything to do? 
 
Naudé: When you say that, one says, “If there is nothing to do  then the circus 
goes on.” 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, Sir. Look! The circus goes on only when there is the 
exercise of will. 
 
Naudé: Are you saying that the circus that we have been discussing and trying to 
change, is in fact made up of will? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : My will against your will, and so on. 
 
Naudé: My will against another part of me. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And so on. 
 
Naudé: My desire to smoke... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s just it. A mind which star ts by saying, “I must change,” 
realizes that one fragment asserting it must change is still in conflict with another 
fragment, which is part of consciousness.  It realizes that. Therefore it also 
realizes that will, to which man has become accustomed, which he takes for 
granted is the only way to bring about change... 
 
Naudé: ...is not the factor of change. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is not the factor of change. Th erefore such a mind has come to 
quite a different height. 
 
Naudé: It has cleared up a great deal. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : A vast quantity of rubbish. 
 
Naudé: It has cleared up the division be tween the inner and the outer; the 
division between consciousness and its conten t. It has cleared up also the division 
between the conscious entity and the co nsciousness belonging to him and the 
various fragments. And it has cleared up th e division between different fragments 
in that consciousness. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : So what has happened? What has happened to the mind that has 
seen all this? Not theoretically but actua lly felt it and says, “No more will in my 
life”. Which means no more resistance in my life. 
 
Naudé: This is so extraordinary it is like finding the sky at  the bottom, one day. It 
is such a great change, it is difficult to say what the extent of that change is. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It has already taken place! That is my point. 
 
Naudé: You are saying that there is no more will, there is no mo re effort, there is 
no more division between th e outside and the inside... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : ...no more fragmentation within consciousness. 
 
Naudé: No more fragmentation. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is very important to understand, Sir. 
 
Naudé: No more observer separate from what he has observed. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Which means what? No fragmenta tion within consciousness. 
Which means consciousness only exists  when there is conflict between 
fragments. 
 
Naudé: I am not sure that I have understo od that. Consciousess is its fragments? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Consciousness is its fragments and consciousness is the battle 
between the fragments. 
 
Naudé: Are you saying that there are only fragm ents because they are in conflict, 
in battle? When they are not battling together they are not fragments, because 
they are not acting as parts. The acting of  one part on another ceases. That is 
what it means when you say fragmentation. That is what fragmentation is. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : See what has taken place! 
 
Naudé: The fragments disappear when they are not acting against each other. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Naturally! When Pakistan and India... 
 
Naudé: ...are no longer fighting, there is no more Pakistan and India. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Naturally. 
 
Naudé: Are you saying that that is the change? 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Wait, I don’t know yet. We’ll go into it. A human mind has 
realized that the world is “me” and I am the world, my consciousness is the 
consciousness of the world, and the worl d’s consciousness is me. The content of 
consciousness with all its miseries and so on is consciousness. And within that 
consciousness there are a thousand fragm entations. One fragment of those many 
fragments becomes the authority, the censor, the obse rver, the examiner, the 
thinker. 
 
Naudé: The boss. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The boss. And so he main tains fragmentation. See the 
importance of this! The moment he assu mes the authority, he must maintain 
fragmentation. 
 
Naudé: Yes, obviously. Because it is a part of  consciousness acting on the rest of 
consciousness. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Therefore he must maintain conflict. And conflict is 
consciousness. 
 
Naudé: You have said that the fragments are consciousness;  and are you now 
saying that the fragments ar e in fact the content? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course. 
 
Naudé: Fragments are conflict. There is no fragment without conflict? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : When is consciousness active? 
 
Naudé: When it is in conflict. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Obviously. Otherwise there is fr eedom, freedom to observe. So 
radical revolution in consciousness, and of  consciousness, takes place when there 
is no conflict at all. 
 
MALIBU , CALIFORNIA  
27 MARCH 1971 2 
 
 
ON GOOD AND EVIL  
 
 
Conversation between J. Krishnamurti 
and Alain Naudé 
 
 
Naudé: Do good and evil really exist, or are they simply co nditioned points of 
view? Is there such a thing as evil and if so what is it? Is there such a thing as 
sin? And is there such a thin g as goodness? And what is it to be really and deeply 
good? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I was thinking this morning on the same theme as your 
questions imply, whether there is an absolute good and ab solute evil: as the 
Christian idea of sin and the Asiatic idea of Karma—as action which breeds more 
misery and more sorrow and yet out of that conflict of sorrow and pain a 
goodness is born. I was thinking abou t it the other day when I saw on the 
television some men killing baby seals. It is a terrible thing, I turned my head 
away quickly. Killing has always been  wrong, not  only human beings but 
animals. And religious people, not the pe ople who believe in religion, but the 
really religious mind, has always shunned every form of killing. Of course, when 
you eat a vegetable you are killing—a vege table—but that is the least form of 
killing and the simplest form  of survival: I wouldn’t call that killing. One has 
watched in India, in Europe , and in America the accepta nce of killing in war, in 
organized murder, which wa r is. Also “killing” people  with words, with a 
gesture, with a look, with contempt: this form of killing has al so been decried by 
religious people. But in spite of it a ll, killing has been going on—killing, 
violence, brutality, arrogance, aggressi veness—all ultimately leading, in action 
or in thought, to hurting,  to brutalizing others. Also  one has seen those ancient 
caves in North Africa and in the South of France wh ere man is shown fighting 
animals, where perhaps fighting evil is unde rstood. Or is it fighting as a form of 
amusement, to kill something, to overcome? So when one looks at all this, one 
asks if there is such a thing as evil in itself, totally devoid of the good; and what 
is the distance between ev il and good. Is evil the di minution of good, slowly 
ending in evil? Or is good the diminutio n of evil, gradually becoming good? That 
is, through the time interv al, moving from goodness to evil, and from evil to 
good? 
 
Naudé: You mean are they two ends of the same stick? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Two ends of the same stick—or  are they two wholly separate 
things? So what is evil an d what is good? The Chris tian world, the Inquisition, 
used to burn people for heresy , considering that was good. Naudé: The Communists do the same. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The Communists do it in their ow n way: for the good of the 
community, for the good of society, for the good of an economic well-being for 
the whole of man, and so on. In Asia too they have done all this kind of thing in 
various forms. But there has always been  a group, until recen tly, where killing in 
any form was considered evil. Now all that  is slowly disappearing, for economic 
and cultural reasons. 
 
Naudé: You mean the group that avoids killing... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : ...is gradually disappearing. So th ere it is. Now is there such a 
thing as absolute good, and absolute evil? Or is it a gradation: relative goodness 
and relative evil? 
 
Naudé: And do they exist as facts outside  of conditioned points of view? For 
instance, for the Frenchma n during the war the invadi ng German was evil; and 
similarly for the German, the German  soldier was good, he represented 
protection. Now is there a good and an evil, absolutely? Or is  it simply the result 
of a conditioned point of view? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is goodness dependent on the environment, on culture, on 
economic conditions? And if it is, is it good? Can goodness flower as an 
environmental, cultural cond itioning? And is evil also th e result of environmental 
culture? Does it function within that fra me, or does it function outside it? All 
these questions are implied when we as k: is there an ab solute goodness and 
absolute evil? 
 
Naudé: Right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : First of all, what is goodness? Isn’t the word “goodness” related 
to the word “God”? God being the highest form of the good, truth, excellence, 
and the capacity to express in relations hip that quality of go dliness, which is 
goodness; and anything opposite that is c onsidered evil. If goodn ess is related to 
God, then evil is related to  the devil. The devil bei ng the ugly, the dark, the... 
 
Naudé: ...the twisted... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : ...the distorted, the purposefully  directed harmful, such as the 
desire to hurt—all that is contrary to th e good; that is, the idea of God being good 
and the devil being the evil—right? Now I think we have more  or less indicated 
what is good and what is evil. So we are asking if there is  such a thing as 
absolute good and absolu te, irrevocable evil. 
 
Naudé: Evil as a fact, as a thing. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Therefore let us first examine if  there is absolu te good. Not in 
the sense of goodness being related to God,  or approximating its elf to the idea of 
God, because then that g oodness becomes merely speculative. Because God to 
most people is really a pretence of a belief in something—so mething excellent, 
noble. 
 
Naudé: Felicity? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Felicity and so on. Now what is  good? I feel goodness is total 
order. Not only outwardly, but especially  inwardly. I think that order can be 
absolute, as in mathematics I believe there is comp lete order. And it is disorder 
that leads to chaos, to destruction,  to anarchy, to the so-called evil. 
 
Naudé: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Whereas total order in one’s bei ng, order in the mind, order in 
one’s heart, order in one’s physical ac tivities—the harmony be tween the three is 
goodness. 
 
Naudé: The Greeks used to say that perfect ed man had attuned in total harmony 
his mind, his heart and his body. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Quite. So we shall say for the mo ment that goodness is absolute 
order. And as most human beings live in di sorder they contribu te to every form 
of mischief, which ultimately leads to destruction, to brutality, to violence, to 
various injuries, both psychic and physical.  For all that one word may be used: 
“evil”. But I don’t like that word “evil” because it is loaded  with Christian 
meaning, with condemnation and prejudice. 
 
Naudé: Conditioning. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s right. In India and in As ia the words “evil”, “sin”, are 
always loaded—as “goodness” is always loaded. So could we brush away all the 
accumulations around these word s and look at it as though anew? That is: is there 
absolute order in oneself? Can this absolute order be brought about in oneself and 
therefore in the outer world? Because th e world is me, and I am the world; my 
consciousness is the consciousness of the world, and the consciousness of the 
world is me. So when there is order within  the human being then there is order in 
the world. Now can this or der, right through, be absolu te? Which means: order in 
the mind, in the heart and in  the bodily activities. Th at is, complete harmony. 
How can this be brought about? That is one point. 
Then the other point is: is order something to be copied according to a 
design? Is order pre-established by thought, by the intellect, and copied in action 
by the heart? Or in relationshi p? So is order a blueprint?  How is this order to be 
brought about? 
 Naudé: Right. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Order is virtue. And disorder is non-virtue, is harmful, is 
destructive, is impure—if we can use that word. 
 
Naudé: One thinks of the Sanskrit word “ Adharma”. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Adharma , yes. So is order something put together according to a 
design drawn by knowledge, thought? Or is order outside  the field of thought and 
knowledge? One feels there is  absolute goodness, not as an emotional concept, 
but one knows, if one has gon e into oneself deep ly, that there is such a thing: 
complete, absolute, irrevocab le goodness, or order. And this order is not a thing 
put together by thought; if it is, then it is  according to a blueprint, but if it is 
imitated then the imitation leads to diso rder, or to conformity. Conformity, 
imitation, and the denial of what is, is the beginning of disorder, leading 
ultimately to what may be called evil. So we are asking: is goodness, which is (as 
we said) order and virtue, is it the produ ct of thought? Which means can it be 
cultivated by thought? Can virtue ever be cultivated? To cu ltivate implies to 
bring slowly into being, which means time. 
 
Naudé: Mental synthesis. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. Now is virtue the result of  time? And is order therefore a 
matter of evolution? And so is absolute  order, absolute goodness, a matter of 
slow growth, cultivation, a ll involving time? As we said  the other day thought is 
the response of memory, knowledge, and experience, which is the past, which is 
stored up in the brain. In the brain cells themselves the past is. So does virtue lie 
in the past and is it therefore cultivatable , to be pushed forward? Or is virtue, 
order, only in the no w? The now is not related to the past. 
 
Naudé: You are saying that goodness is order and that order is not the product of 
thought; but order, if it exists at all, mu st exist in behaviour, behaviour in the 
world and in relationship. People alwa ys think that proper behaviour in 
relationship, in the world, must be plan ned, that order is always the result of 
planning. And quite often people get the id ea, when they have listened to you, 
that awareness, the state of being you sp eak about in which there is no room for 
the action of thought, they get the feeling th at this is a sort of disincarnate energy, 
which can have no action and no relations hip to the world of men and events and 
behaviour. They think that th erefore it has no real value, and not what you might 
call a temporal and historical significance. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Right, Sir. 
 
Naudé: You are saying that goodness is order and order is not planned. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : When we talk about order, don’t we mean order in behaviour, in 
relationship, not an abstract order, not a goodness in heaven , but order, goodness 
in relationship and action in the now. Wh en we talk about planning, obviously 
there must be planning at a certain level. 
 
Naudé: Architecture. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Architecture, building railways, going to the moon and so on, 
there must be a design, a planning, a ve ry coordinated, intelligent operation 
taking place. We are surely not mixing up  the two: there must be planning, order, 
cooperation, the carrying out together of certain plans, a well laid-out city, a 
community—all that demands planning. We  are talking of something entirely 
different. We are asking if there is absolu te order in human behaviour, if there is 
absolute goodness, as order, in oneself and therefore in  the world. And we said 
order is not planned, can never be pla nned. If it is planned, then the mind is 
seeking security, because the brain dema nds security; seeking security it will 
suppress, or destroy, or pervert what is and try to conform, imitate. This very 
imitation and conformity is disorder, fro m which all the mischief begins, the 
neuroses and various distor tions of the mind and the heart. Planning implies 
knowledge. 
 
Naudé: Thinking. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Knowledge, thinking and ordering  the thought as ideas. So we 
are asking: is virtue the outcome of pl anning? Obviously it is not. The moment 
your life is planned according to a pattern  then you are not living, you are merely 
conforming to a certain standard and therefore that conformity leads to 
contradiction in oneself. The “what is” and the “what should be”, that breeds 
contradiction and therefore conflict. That very conflict is the source of disorder. 
So order, virtue, goodness is in the moment  of the now. And therefore it is free of 
the past. That freedom can be relative. 
 
Naudé: How do you mean? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : One may be conditioned by the culture in which one lives, by 
the environment and so on . One either frees onese lf totally from all the 
conditioning and therefore is absolute ly free; or there may be partial 
unconditioning. 
 
Naudé: Yes, get rid of one set of conditions... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : ...and fall into another. 
 
Naudé: Or just discard one set like Christianity and its taboos. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : So that slow discarding may appear orderly, but it is not; 
because the slow peeling off of co nditioning may tem porarily give the 
appearance of freedom, but is not absolute freedom. 
 
Naudé: Are you saying that freedom is not the result of a particular operation 
with regard to one conditioning o another? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s right. 
 
Naudé: You have said that freedom is at th e beginning and not at the end. Is that 
what you mean? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, that’s it. Freedom is now,  not in the futu re. So freedom, 
order, or goodness, is now, which expresses itself in behaviour. 
 
Naudé: Yes, else it has no meaning. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Otherwise it has no meaning at all. Behaviour in relationship 
not only with a particular individual, who is close to  you, but behaviour with 
everybody. 
 
Naudé: In the absence of all those elements  of the past which make most people 
behave, what will make us behave? This  freedom seems to so many people such 
a disincarnate thing, such a bleak sky, such an immaterial thing.  What is it in that 
freedom which will make us behave in the world of people  and events with 
order? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, look. We said in the last conversation that I am the world 
and the world is me. We said the consciousness of the world is my 
consciousness. My consciousness is the world’s consciousness. When you make 
a statement of that kind, either it is pur ely verbal and therefore has no meaning at 
all, or it is something actual, living, vital. When one realizes  that it is vital, in that 
realization is compassion—real compassi on, not for one or two, but compassion 
for everybody, for everything. Freedom  is this compassion, which is not 
disincarnate as an idea. 
 
Naudé: As a state of withdrawal. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : My relationship is only in the now, not in the past, because if 
my relationship is rooted in the past I am not related now. So freedom is 
compassion, and that comes wh en there is the real deep realization that I am the 
world, the world is me. Freedom, compassion, order, virtue, goodness are one; and that is absolu te. Now what relationship has non-goodness—which has been 
called evil, sin, original sin—what relationship has that with this marvellous sense of order? 
 Naudé: Which is not the product of thi nking, of civilization, of culture. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What is the relationship betw een the two? There is none. So 
when we move away from this order—mo ve away in the sense of misbehave—
does one enter into the field of evil, if we can use that  word? Or is evil something 
totally apart from the good? 
 
Naudé: Whether deviation from the order of go odness is already an entry into the 
field of evil, or can these two not even touch at all? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s right. I may misbeh ave. I may tell a lie. I may 
consciously or unconsciously hurt anothe r, but I can clear it. I can wipe it away 
by apologizing, by saying “forgive m e”. It can be done immediately. 
 
Naudé: It can be ended. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So I am finding out something, which is: the non-ending of it, 
carrying it over in one’s mind day after day, as hate, as a grudge... 
 
Naudé: ...guilt, fear... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : ...does that nourish the evil? You follow? 
 
Naudé: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : If I continue with it, keep w ithin my mind the grudge which I 
bear against you, carry it on day after day,  the grudge which involves hate, envy, 
jealousy, antagonism—all that is violence. So what is the relationship of violence 
to evil and goodness? We are using the word “evil” very... 
 
Naudé: ...cautiously. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Cautiously. Because I don’t like that  word at all. So what is the 
relationship between violence and goodn ess? Obviously none at all! But the 
violence which I have cultivated—whether  it is the product of society, the 
product of the culture, the environmen t, or inherited from the animal—that 
violence, by becoming aware of it, can be wiped away. 
 
Naudé: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Not a gradual wiping away; wi pe it away as you wipe out a 
clean... 
 
Naudé: ...take a mark off the wall. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Then you are always in that goodness. Naudé: Are you saying that goodness is a wholly negative affair then? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, it must be. 
 
Naudé: And in that way the negative is not re lated at all to the positive, because 
it is not the result of a gradual declin e or accumulation of the positive. The 
negative exists when the positive is wholly absent. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes; put it round the other way. The negation of the grudge, the 
negation of violence and the negation of the continuity of the violence, that 
negation of it is the good. 
 
Naudé: Is the emptying. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The emptying of violence is  the richness of the good. 
 
Naudé: Therefore the good is always intact. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, it is never broken up, not fragmented. Sir, wait! So is there 
such a thing as absolute evil? I don’t kno w if you have ever considered this: I 
have seen in India little statues made of clay in which needle s, or thorns, have 
been put; I have seen it very  often. The image is supposed to represent a person 
whom you want to hurt. In India there are very long th orns, you have seen them, 
from bushes, and they are stuck into these clay statuettes. 
 
Naudé: I didn’t know they did that in India. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I have seen it. Now there  is a determined action to produce evil 
in another, to hurt another. 
 
Naudé: An intent. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The intent, the ug ly, deep, hatred. 
 
Naudé: Deliberate. This must be evil, Sir. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What is its relationship to g ood—good being all that we have 
said? This is a real in tent to hurt people. 
 
Naudé: Organized disorder, one might say. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Organized disorder, which is the organized disorder of a society 
that rejects the good. Because the society is me. I am the society; if I don’t 
change, society cannot change. And here is the deliberate intention to hurt 
another, whether it is organized as war or not. 
 Naudé: In fact, organized war is the grou p manifestation of the phenomenon you 
are speaking about in India, putting th e thorns through the little statues. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : This is well known, this is as ol d as the hills. So I am saying this 
desire to hurt, consciously or unconsciou sly, and yielding to it, and giving it 
sustenance, is what? Wo uld you call that evil? 
 
Naudé: Of course. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Then we shall have to  say that will is evil. 
 
Naudé: Aggression is evil. Violence is evil. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait, see it! Will is evil, because I want to hurt you. 
 
Naudé: Someone might say though: the will to do you good—is that will also 
evil? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You cannot will to do good. Either you are good, or not good, 
you can’t will goodness. Will being the co ncentration of thought as resistance. 
 
Naudé: Yes, you said that goodness is  the absence of a blueprint. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So I am asking: is evil related to the good, or are the two things 
totally apart? And is there such a thing as ab solute evil? There is absolute good, 
but absolute evil cannot exist. Right? 
 
Naudé: Yes, because evil is alwa ys cumulative, it is always to some degree or 
another. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. So a man with the deep intention to hurt another—some 
incident, some accident, some affection or  care, might change the whole thing. 
But to say that there is an absolute sin, absolu te evil, is the most terrible thing to 
say. That is evil. 
 
Naudé: The Christians have personified evil as Satan and as an almost immutable force, almost equal to th e good, almost equal to G od. The Christians have 
enthroned evil almost eternally. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Look, Sir. You have seen those bu shes in India, they have got 
long thorns, nearly two inches long. 
 
Naudé: Yes. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : There are snakes which are poisonous, deadly poisonous, there 
are other things which are fri ghteningly cruel in nature, like the white shark, that 
appalling thing we saw the ot her day. Is that evil? 
 
Naudé: No. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No? 
 
Naudé: No, Sir. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is protecting itself: the thor n is protecting itself against the 
animal so that the leaves are not eaten. 
 
Naudé: Yes and so is the snake. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So is the snake. 
 
Naudé: And the shark is following its nature. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So see what it means. Anything that is self-protective in the 
physical sense is not evil. But protec ting oneself psychologically, resisting any 
movement, leads to disorder. 
 
Naudé: If I may interrupt here. This is the argument which many people use 
about war. They say th at building up an army and us ing it, for instance, in South 
East Asia is the kind of physical protection which the shark... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is too absurd an argument.  The whole world is divided up 
for psychological reasons as “my count ry” and “your country”, “my God” and 
“your God”—that and economic reasons ar e the cause of war, surely? But I am 
trying to get at something different. Nature is terrible in certain ways. 
 
Naudé: Ruthless. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We human beings looking at it say, “That’s evil, how terrible”. 
 
Naudé: Lightning. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Earthquakes which destroy a thousand people in a few seconds. 
So the moment we assert that there is ab solute evil, that ve ry assertion is the 
denial of the good. Goodne ss implies total abnegation of the self. Because the 
“me” is always separative. The “me”, “my family”, the self, the person, the ego, 
is the centre of disorder, b ecause it is a divisive facto r. The “me” is the mind, is 
thought. And we have neve r been able to move away from this egocentric 
activity. To move completely away from it is complete  order, freedom, goodness. 
And to remain in the circle of self-cen tred movement breeds disorder; there is always conflict there. And we attribute this  conflict to evil, to  the devil, to bad 
karma, to environment, to society; but the society is me and I have built this 
society. So unless this “me” is totally transformed, I am always contributing, to a 
major extent or to a mi nor extent, to disorder. 
Order means behaviour in freedom. And freedom means love and not 
pleasure. When one observes all this on e sees very clearly that there is a 
marvellous sense of absolute order. 
 
MALIBU , CALIFORNIA  
28 MARCH 1971  
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDIA  
 
IV 
 
Two Conversations: 
J. Krishnamurti and Swami Venkatesananda 
 
 
1  The guru and search. Four schools of  Yoga scrutinized  (Karma, Bhakti, 
Raja, Gnana Yoga). 
2  Four “mahavakyas” from the Upanis hads discussed. Communication and 
the Bodhisattva ideal. Vedanta and the ending of knowledge. 1 
 
 
J. KRISHNAMURTI AND  
SWAMI VENKATESANANDA  
 
 
The guru and search. 
Four schools of Yoga scrutinized 
(Karma, Bhakti, Raja and Gnana Yoga). 
 
 
Swami Venkatesananda:1 Krishnaji, I come as a humble speaker to a guru, not in 
the sense of hero-worship but in  the literal sense which the word guru  means, 
that is the remover of darkne ss, of ignoran ce. The word “ gu” stands for the 
darkness of ignorance and “ ru” stands for the remover, the dispeller. Hence guru  
is the light that dispels the darkness of  ignorance and you are that light for me 
now. We sit in the tent here at Saan en listening to yo u and I cannot help 
visualizing similar scenes; for instance, of  the Buddha addressing the Bikshus, or 
of Vasishta instructing Rama in the r oyal court of Dasaratha. We have a few 
examples of these gurus  in the Upanishads; first there was Varuna, the guru . He 
merely prods his disciple with the words “Tapasa Brahma  ... Tapo Brahmeti”. 
“What is Brahman ?—Don’t ask me.” Tapo Brahman, tapas, austerity or 
discipline—or as you yourself  often say, “Find out”—is Brahman  and the 
disciple must himself discover the trut h, though by stages. Yajnyavalkya and 
Uddhalaka adopted a more direct approa ch. Yajnyavalkya instructing his wife 
Maitreyi, used the neti-neti  method. You cannot describe Brahman  positively, 
but when you eliminate everyt hing else, it is there. As you said the other day, 
love cannot be described—“this is it”—but  only by eliminating what is not love. 
Uddhalaka used several analogi es to enable his disciples to see the truth and then 
nailed it with the famous expression Tat-Twam-Asi . Dakshinamurti instructed his 
disciples by silence and Chinmudra. It is said that the Sanatkumaras went to him 
for instruction. Dakshinamurti just kept silent and showed the Chinmudra and the 
disciples looked at him and got enlightened. It is believed that one cannot realize 
the truth without the help of a guru . Obviously even those people who regularly 
come to Saanen are greatly helped in their quest. Now,  what according to you is 
the role of a guru , a preceptor or an awakener? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Sir, if you are using the word guru in the classical sense, which is the 
dispeller of darkness, of ignorance, can another, whatever he be, enlightened or 
stupid, really help to dispel this dar kness in oneself? Suppos e “A” is ignorant and 
you are his guru —guru  in the accepted sense, one who dispels darkness and one 
who carries the burden for another, one who points out—can such a guru  help 
another? Or rather can the guru  dispel the darkness of another?—not 
                                                 
1 Swami Venkatesananda, scholar and teacher, asks to be identified only by his name. theoretically but actually. Can you, if you are the guru  of so and so, dispel his 
darkness, dispel the darkness for another? Knowing that he is unhappy, confused, 
has not enough brain matter, has not enoug h love, or sorrow, ca n you dispel that? 
Or has he to work treme ndously on himself? You ma y point out, you may say, 
“Look, go through that door,” but he has to do the work entirely from the 
beginning to the end. Therefore, you are not a guru in the accepted sense of that 
word, if you say that another cannot help. 
 
Swamiji:  It is just this: the “if” and “but”. Th e door is there. I have to go through. 
But there is this ignorance of where the door is. You, by pointing out, remove 
that ignorance. 
 
KRISHNAJI : But I have to walk there. Sir, you are the guru  and you point out the 
door. You have finished your job. 
 
Swamiji:  So darkness of ignorance is removed. 
 
KRISHNAJI : No, your job is finished and it is now for me to get up, walk, and see 
what is involved in walking. I have to do all that. 
 
Swamiji:  That is perfect. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Therefore you do not dispel my darkness. 
 
Swamiji:  I am sorry, but I do not know how to get out of this room. I am ignorant 
of the existence of a door in a certain direction and the guru removes the 
darkness of that ignorance. And then I take the necessary steps to get out. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Sir, let us be clear. Ignorance is la ck of understanding, or the lack of 
understanding of oneself, not  the big self or the little self. The door is the “me” 
through which I have to go. It  is not outside of “me”. It  is not a factual door as 
that painted door. It is a door in me through which I have to go. You say, “Do 
that.” 
 
Swamiji:  Exactly. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Your function as the guru is then finished. You do not become 
important. I do not put garlands around your head. I have to do all the work. You have not dispelled the darkness of ignoranc e. You have, rather, pointed out to me 
that, “You are the door  through which you yourself have to go.” 
 
Swamiji:  But would you, Krishnaji, accept th at that pointing out was necessary? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Yes, of course. I point out, I do that. We all do that. I ask a man on 
the road, “Will you please tell me which is the way to Saanen?”, and he tells me; but I do not spend time and express devotion and say, “My God, you are the 
greatest of men.” That is too childish! 
 
Swamiji:  Thank you, Sir. Closely related to what the guru  is, there is the question 
of what discipline is, which you define d as learning. Vedanta classifies the 
seekers according to their qualifications , or maturity, and prescribes suitable 
methods of learning. The disciple with the keenest perception is given instruction in silence, or a brie f awakening word like Tat-Twam-Asi . He is called 
Uttamadhikari . The disciple with the mediocre  ability is given more elaborate 
treatment; he is called Madhyamadhikari . The dull-witted is entertained with 
stories, rituals, etc., hoping for greater maturity; he is called Adhamadhikari . 
Perhaps you will comment on this? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Yes, the top, the middle and bottom.  That implies, Sir, that we have 
to find out what we mean by maturity. 
 
Swamiji:  May I explain that? You said the other day, “The whole world is 
burning, you must realize the seriousness of it.” And that hit me like a bolt—even to grasp that truth. But there may be millions who just do not bother; they 
are not interested. Those we shall call the Adhama , the lowest. There are others 
like the Hippies and so on who play with it, who may be entertained with stories and who say, “We are unhappy,” or who tell you, “We know society is a mess, 
we will take L.S.D.”, and so on. And th ere may be others who respond to that 
idea, that the world is burning, and that  immediately sparks them. We find them 
everywhere. How does  one handle them? 
 
KRISHNAJI : How to handle the people who are utterly immature, those who are 
partially mature, and those who consider themselves mature? 
 
Swamiji:  Correct. 
 
KRISHNAJI : To do that, we have to understa nd what we mean by maturity. What 
do you think is maturity? Do es it depend on age, time? 
 
Swamiji:  No. 
 
KRISHNAJI : So we can remove that. Time, age is not an indication of maturity. 
Then there is the maturity  of the very learned man, the man who is highly, 
intellectually capable. 
 
Swamiji:  No, he may twist and turn the words. 
 
KRISHNAJI : So, we will eliminate that. Whom would you consider as a mature, 
ripe man? 
 
Swamiji:  The man who is able to observe. KRISHNAJI : Wait. Obviously the man who goes to churches, to temples, to 
mosques is out; so is the intellectual, the religious and the emotional. We should 
say, if we eliminate all th at, maturity consists in being not self-centred—not 
“me” first and everybody else second, or my emotions fi rst. So maturity implies 
the absence of the “me”. 
 
Swamiji:  Fragmentation, to use a better word. 
 
KRISHNAJI : The “me” which creates the fragmen ts. Now, how would you appeal 
to that man? And to the man who is half one and half the other, “me” and “not me”, who plays with both? And the ot her one who is completely “me”, who 
enjoys himself? How do y ou appeal to these three? 
 
Swamiji:  How do you awaken these th ree?—that is the trouble. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Wait! The man who is completely  “me”, there is no awakening in 
him. He is not interested. He won’t even listen to you. He will listen to you if you 
promise him something, heaven, hell, fear  or more profit in the world, more 
money; but he will do it in order to ga in. So the man who wishes to gain, 
achieve, is immature. 
 
Swamiji:  Quite right. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Whether Nirvana, Heaven, Moksha, attainment, or enlightenment, he 
is immature. Now, what w ill you do with such a man? 
 
Swamiji:  Tell him stories. 
 
KRISHNAJI : No, why should I tell him stories,  befuddle him more by my stories 
or by your stories? Why not leav e him alone? He would not listen. 
 
Swamiji:  It is cruel. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Cruel on whose part? He won’t liste n to you. Let us be factual. You 
come to me. I am the total “me”. I am not  concerned with anything but “me”, but 
you say “Look, you are making a mess of the world, you are creating such misery 
for man”, and I say, please go away. Put it  any way you like; put it in stories, 
cover it with pills, sweet pills, but he is not going to change the “me”. If he does, 
he comes to the middle—the “me” and the “not me”. This is called evolution. 
The man who is the lowest reaches the middle. 
 
Swamiji:  How? 
 
KRISHNAJI : By knocking. Life forces him, te aches him. There is war, hatred; he 
is destroyed. Or he goes into a church. The church is a trap to him. It does not 
enlighten him, it does not say, “For God’s sake break through,” but it says it will give him what he wants—entertainment, whether Jesus entertainment, or Hindu 
entertainment, or Buddhist, or Muslim  or whatever it is—it will give him 
entertainment, only in the name of God. So they keep him at th e same level, with 
little modifications, a little bit of polish, better culture, be tter clothes, etc. That is 
what is happening. He probably makes up (as you said just now) eighty per cent 
of the world, more perhaps, ninety per cent. 
 
Swamiji:  What can you do? 
 
KRISHNAJI : I won’t add to it, I won’t tell hi m stories, I won’t entertain him; 
because there are others who are already entertaining him. 
 
Swamiji:  Thank you. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Then there is the middle type, the “me” and the “not-me”, who does 
social reforms, a little bit of good here and there, but always the “me” operating. 
Socially, politically, religiously , in every way, the “me” is  operating. But a little 
more quietly, with a little mo re polish. Now to him you can talk a little bit, say, 
“Look, a social reform is all right in its  place but it leads you nowhere,” and so 
on. You can talk to him. Perhaps he w ill listen to you. The other one will not 
listen to you at all. This chap will liste n to you, pay a little attention and perhaps 
say this is too serious, this requires t oo much work and slip s back into his old 
pattern. We shall talk to him and leave hi m. What he wants to do is up to him. 
Now, there is the other one who is getting out of the “me” , who is stepping out of 
the circle of the “me”. There, you can ta lk to him. He will pay attention to you. 
So one talks to all the three, not distinguishing between those who are mature and those who are not mature. We will talk to all the three categories, the three types, 
and leave it to them. 
 
Swamiji:  The one who is not interested, he will walk out. 
 
KRISHNAJI : He will walk out of the tent, he w ill walk out of the room. That is his 
affair. He goes to his church, football, entertainment or whatever it is. But the 
moment you say “you are immature and I will teach you more”, he becomes... 
 
Swamiji:  Boosted up. 
 
KRISHNAJI : The seed of poison is already ther e. Sir, if the soil is right, the grain 
will take root. But to say, “You are mature , and you are immature ”, that is totally 
wrong. Who am I to tell somebody that he is immature? It is for him to find out. 
 
Swamiji:  But can a fool find out that he is a fool? 
 
KRISHNAJI : If he is a fool he won’t even liste n to you. You see,  Sir, we start out 
with the idea of wanting to help. 
 Swamiji:  That is what we are basing our whole discussion upon. 
 
KRISHNAJI : I think the approach of wanting to  help is not valid, except in the 
medical world or in the technological world. If I am ill it is necessary to go to the 
doctor to be cured. Here, psychologically, if  I am asleep, I won’t listen to you. If 
I am half awake, I will listen to you acco rding to my vacant state, according to 
my moods. Therefore, to the one man who says, “I really want to keep awake, 
keep psychologically awake”, to him you can  talk. So we talk  to all of them. 
 
Swamiji:  Thank you. That clears up a big mi sunderstanding. When sitting alone, 
I reflected over what you had said earli er in the day. I cannot help the 
spontaneous feeling. “Ah, the Buddha said  so, or Vasishtha said so”, though 
immediately I endeavour to cut through the imagery of the words to find the 
meaning. You help us find the meaning,  though perhaps th at is not your 
intention. So did Vasishtha and the Buddha. People come here as they went to 
those great ones. Why? What is there in human nature that seeks, that gropes and 
grasps for a crutch? Again, not to help them may be a cruelty, but to spoon-feed 
them may be greater cruelty. What does one do? 
 
KRISHNAJI : The question being, why do people need crutches? 
 
Swamiji:  Yes, and whether to help them or not. 
 
KRISHNAJI : That is it: whether you should gi ve them crutches to lean on. Two 
questions are involved. Why do people ne ed crutches? And whether you are the 
person to give them the crutches? 
 
Swamiji:  Should one or should one not? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Should one or should one not, and whether you are capable of giving 
them help?—those two questions are invo lved. Why do people want crutches, 
why do people want to depend on others, whether it is Jesus, Buddha, or ancient 
saints, why? 
 
Swamiji:  First of all, there is something that  is seeking. The seeking itself seems 
to be good. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Is it? Or is it their fear of not achieving something which the saints, 
the great people, have pointed out? Or the fear of going wr ong, of not being 
happy, of not getting enlightenment, unde rstanding, or whatever you call it? 
 
Swamiji:  May I quote a beautiful expressi on from the Bhagavadgita? Krishna 
said: four types of people come to me. Th e one who is in distress; he comes to 
me for the removal of distre ss. Then there is the one who is a curious man; he 
just wants to know what is this God, trut h, and whether there is heaven and hell? 
The third one wants some money. He also  comes to God and prays to get more money. And the Gyani, the wise man, also  comes. All of them  are good, because 
they are all, somehow or the other, seek ing God. But of all these, I think the 
Gyani is the best one. So the seek ing may be due to  various reasons. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Yes, Sir. There are these two questi ons. First of all, why do we seek? 
Then, why does humanity demand crutch es? Now, why does one seek, why 
should one seek at all? 
 
Swamiji:  Why should one seek?—because one finds something missing. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Which means what? I am unhappy an d I want happiness. That is a 
form of seeking. I do not k now what enlightenment is. I have read about it in 
books and it appeals to me and I seek it. Also I seek a better job, because there is 
more money, more profit, more enjoym ent and so on. In all these there is 
seeking, searching, wanting. I can und erstand the man wanting a better job, 
because society as it is constituted is so monstrously arranged, that it makes him seek more money, a better job. But psychologically, inwardly, what am I seeking? And when I do find  it, in my search, how do I know that what I find is 
true? 
 
Swamiji:  Perhaps the seeking drops. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Wait, Sir. How do I know? In my se arch, how do I know that this is 
the truth? How do I know? Can I ever say “This is the truth”? Therefore why 
should I seek it? So what makes me seek? What makes one seek is a much more fundamental question than the search, and saying, “This is the truth.” If I say, 
“This is the truth”, I must know it already. If I know it already, it is not truth. It is 
something dead, past, wh ich tells me that is the truth.  A dead thing cannot tell me 
what is truth. 
So why do I seek? Because, deeply I am unhappy, deeply I am confused, 
deeply there is great sorrow in me and I want to find a way out of it. You come 
along as the guru , as an enlightened man, or as a professor and say, “Look, this is 
the way out.” The basic reason for my sear ch is to escape from this agony and I 
posit that I can escape sorrow, and that enlightenment is  over there, or in myself. 
Can I escape from it? I cannot in the sense of avoiding it, resisting it, running away from it; it is there. Wher ever I go, it is still there. So what I have to do is to 
find out in myself why sorrow has come in to being, why I am suffering. Then, is 
that a search? No. When I want to find out why I am suffering, that is not 
searching. It is not even a quest. It is li ke going to a doctor and saying I have a 
bad tummy, and he says you have eaten the wrong kind of food. So I will avoid 
wrong food. If the cause of my misery is in myself, not necessarily created by the 
environment in which I live, then I have  to find out how to be free from it for 
myself. You may, as the guru, point out that that is the door, but as soon as you 
have pointed it out, your job is over. Then I have to work , then I have to find out 
what to do, how to live, how to think, how to feel this wa y of living in which 
there is no suffering. Swamiji:  Then to that extent  the helping, the pointing out, is justified. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Not justified, but you do it naturally. 
 
Swamiji:  Supposing the other man gets stuck somewhere, that as he proceeds, in 
going there he knocks against this table... 
 
KRISHNAJI : He must learn that the table is ther e. He must learn that when he is 
going towards the door there is an obstacle in the way. If he is enquiring, he will 
find out. But if you come al ong and say, “There is the door, there is the table, 
don’t knock against it”, you are treating him just like a child, leading him to the 
door. There is no meaning to it. 
 
Swamiji:  So that much of help, th e pointing out, is justified? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Any decent man with a decent heart will say, Don’t go there, there is 
a precipice. I once met a very well-known guru i n  I n d i a .  H e  c a m e  t o  s e e  m e .  
There was a mattress on the floor and we  said to him polite ly, please sit on the 
mattress—and he quietly sat on the ma ttress, assumed the position of the guru , 
put his stick in front of him and began to discuss—it was quite a performance he 
put up! And he said: human beings need a guru because we gurus  know better 
than the layman; why should he go thro ugh all the danger al one? We will help 
him. It was impossible to discuss with hi m because he had assumed that he alone 
knew and everybody else was in ignorance.  At the end of ten minutes he left, 
annoyed. 
 
Swamiji:  That is one of the thi ngs for which Krishnaji is famous in India!—Next, 
while you rightly point out  the utter futility of b lindly accepting dogmas, 
formulas, you will not ask for their summar y rejection. While tradition can be a 
deadly block, it is perhaps worth underst anding it and its origin; otherwise, in 
destroying one tradition an equally pernicious  one might spring up. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Quite right. 
 
Swamiji:  Hence may I offer a few traditional be liefs for your scrutiny so that we 
may discover where and how what you ca lled “good intentions” veered towards 
hell—the shell that imprisons us? Each branch of Yoga prescribed its own 
disciplines in the firm conv iction that if one pursued th em in the right spirit one 
would end sorrow. I shall enumer ate them for your comments. 
First, Karma Yoga: it demanded Dharma, or a virtuous life, which was often 
extended to include the much abused Varnashrama Dharma. Krishna’s dictum 
“Swadharme ... Bhayavaha”—seems to have  indicated that if a man voluntarily 
submitted himself to certain rules of co nduct, his mind would be free to observe 
and learn with the help of  certain Bavanas. Would you comment on this?—the 
concept of Dharma and rules and regulations : “do this”, “that is right”, “that is 
wrong...” KRISHNAJI : Which means really, lays down what is right conduct, and I 
voluntarily adopt it. There is a teache r who lays down what is righteous 
behaviour, and I come along and voluntarily, to use your word, take to it, accept 
it. Is there such a thing as voluntary acceptance? And should the teacher lay 
down what is right conduct, which mean s he has set the pattern, the mould, the 
conditioning? You follow the danger of  it?—in his having laid down the 
conditioning which produces right beha viour, which will lead one to heaven. 
 
Swamiji:  That is one aspect of it. The other aspect in wh ich I am more interested, 
is if that is accepted, then the psyc hological apparatus is free to observe. 
 
KRISHNAJI : I understand. No, Sir. Why should I accept it? You are the teacher. 
You lay down the mode of conduct. How do I know that you are right? You may 
be wrong. And I won’t accept your author ity. Because I see th e authority of the 
gurus , the authority of the priest, the au thority of the Church—they have all 
failed. Therefore, with a new teacher layi ng down a new law, I would say, “For 
God’s sake you are playing the same game; I do not accept it.” And is there such 
a thing as voluntary acceptance—voluntar y, free acceptance? Or am I already 
influenced, because you are a teacher, you are the great one, and you promise me 
a reward at the end of it, unconsciously  or consciously, which leads me to 
“voluntarily” accept it? I do not accept it freely. If I am free, I do not accept it at 
all. I live. I live righteously. 
 
Swamiji:  So righteousness must  come from within? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Obviously, what else, Sir? Look at what is going on in the study of 
behaviour. They say outward circumst ances, environment, culture, produce 
certain types of behaviour. That is, if I live in a communist environment with its 
domination, with its threats, concentrati on camps, all that will make me behave 
in a certain way; I put on a mask, frighten ed, and I behave in a certain way. In a 
society which is more or less free, wher e there are not so many rules, because 
nobody believes in rules,  where everything is permitted, there I play. 
 
Swamiji:  Now, which one is more acceptable from the spiritual point of view? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Neither. Because beha viour, virtue, is some thing which cannot be 
cultivated by me or by societ y. I have to find out how to live rightly. Virtue is 
something which is not an acceptance of patterns, or following  a deadly pattern 
of routine. Goodness is not routine. Sure ly, if I am good because my teacher says 
I am good, it is meaningless. Therefor e there is no such thing as voluntary 
acceptance of the righteous behavi our which is laid down by a guru, by a teacher. 
 
Swamiji:  One has to find it for oneself. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Therefore I have to begin to enquir e. I begin to look,  to find out how 
to live. I can only live when there is no fear. Swamiji:  Perhaps I should have explained this . According to Sankara it is meant 
only for the lower. 
 
KRISHNAJI : What is low and high? The mature  and the immature? Sankara or X 
Y Z says, “Lay down the rule for the low and for the high” and they don’t do it. 
They read the books of Sankara, or some pundit reads it to them, and they say 
how marvellous it is and go b ack and live their own life. This is an obvious fact. 
You see it in Italy. They listen to the P ope—they listen earnestly for two or three 
minutes and then go on with their daily life; nobody cares, it does not make any 
difference. That is why I want to ask,  why the so-called Sankaras, Gurus, lay 
down laws about what is behaviour. 
 
Swamiji:  Otherwise there would be chaos. 
 
KRISHNAJI : There is chaos anyhow. There is terrible chaos. In India they have 
read Sankara and all the teachers fo r a thousand years. Look at them! 
 
Swamiji:  Perhaps, according to them, th e alternative is impossible. 
 
KRISHNAJI : What is the alternative? Confusion? And that is what they are living 
in. Why not understand the confusion in  which they are li ving instead of 
Sankara? If they understand conf usion, they can change it. 
 
Swamiji:  Perhaps that leads us on to this question of Bhawana  where a bit of 
psychology is involved. Coming to the Sadhana of Karma Yoga, the Bhagavad 
Gita prescribes among other things a Nimitta Bhawana . Bhawana  is undoubtedly 
Being  and Nimitta Bhawana  is being an egoless instrument in the hands of God 
or the Infinite Being. But it is also take n to mean an attitude or a feeling in the 
hope that it will help a beginner to observe himself and thus the Bhawana  will fill 
his being. Perhaps it is indispensable fo r the people of little understanding; or 
will it permanently distract them by self -deception? How shall we make this 
work? 
 
KRISHNAJI : What is the question you are asking, Sir? 
 
Swamiji:  There is the technique of Bhawana. 
 
KRISHNAJI : That implies a system, a method,  by the practice of which, you 
ultimately reach enlightenment. You prac tise in order to come to God or 
whatever it is. The moment you practise a method, what happ ens? I practise day 
after day the method laid down by you. What happens? 
 
Swamiji:  There is a famous saying, “A s you think so you become”. 
 
KRISHNAJI : I think that by the practice of th is method I will reach enlightenment. 
So what do I do? Every day I practise it . I become more a nd more mechanical. Swamiji:  But there is a feeling. 
 
KRISHNAJI : The mechanical routine is going on with the feeling added, “I like it”, 
“I don’t like it”, “it is a bore”—you know, there is a battle going on. So anything 
I practise, any discipline, any practice in the accepted sense of the word makes 
my mind more and more narrow, limited and dull, and you ar e promising at the 
end of it, heaven. I say it is like sold iers being trained day after day—drill, 
drill—till they are nothing but instruments of the commanding officer or 
sergeant. Give them a little initiative. So I am questioning the whole approach of 
system and method towards enlightenment. Even in factories a man who merely moves a button or pushes this or that does not produce as much as the man who 
is free to learn as he goes along. 
 
Swamiji:  Can you put that into Bhawana ? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Why not? 
 
Swamiji:  So it works? 
 
KRISHNAJI : This is the only way. That is real Bhawana : Learn as you go along, 
therefore be alert as you go along. If I take  a walk and I have a system, a method 
of walking, that is all I am  concerned with: I shall not se e the birds, the trees, the 
marvellous light on the leaf, nothing. An d why should I accept the teacher who 
gives me the method, the mode? He may be as peculiar as I am, and there are teachers who are very odd. So I reject all that. 
 
Swamiji:  The problem again is that of the beginner. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Who is the beginner? The immature one? 
 
Swamiji:  Probably. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Therefore you are giving him a toy to play with? 
 
Swamiji:  Some sort of opening. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Yes a toy and he enjoys that and practises all day and his mind 
remains very small. 
 
Swamiji:  Perhaps that is your answer to th is Bhakti Yoga question too. Again, 
somehow they wanted these people to break through. 
 
KRISHNAJI : I am not at all sure, Sir. 
 
Swamiji:  I will discuss this Bhakti.  Coming to Bhakti Yoga, the Bhakta  is 
encouraged to worship God even in te mples and images, feeling the Divine presence within. In quite a number of mantras, it is repeated again and again, 
“You are the All Pervading ... you are th e Omnipresent”, etc. Krishna asks the 
devotees to see God in the objects of na ture and then as th e “All”. At the same 
time through japa, or the repetition of ma ntra with the corresponding awareness 
of its significance, the devotee is asked to perceive that the divine presence 
outside is identical with the indwelling pr esence. Thus the individual realizes his 
oneness with the collective. Is there a nything fundamentally wrong with that 
system? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Oh! Yes, Sir. The Communist block does not believe in God at all. 
The Communists have set the State above God. They are selfish, they are 
frightened, but there is no God, no mant ras, etc. Another does not know the 
mantras, japa, repetition but he says, “I want  to find out what truth is. I want to 
find out if there is a God at all. There may be no such thin g.” And the Gita and 
all of them assume that ther e is. They assume there is God. Who are they to tell 
me there is or there is not,  including Krishna or X, Y, Z? I say it may be your 
own conditioning; you are born in a partic ular climate and with a particular 
conditioning, with a particular attitude and you believe in that. And then you lay 
down rules. But if I reject all authority , including the Communi sts, including the 
Western and the Asiatic authorities, all au thority, then where am  I? Then I have 
to find out, because I am unhappy, I am miserable. 
 
Swamiji:  But I might be free from conditioning. 
 
KRISHNAJI : That is my business —to be free. Otherwise I cannot learn. If I remain 
a Hindu for the rest of my life, I am finished. The Catholic remains a Catholic 
and the Communist is equally dead. Bu t is it possible—that is really the 
question—to reject all co nditioning which accept s authority? Can I really reject 
all authority and stand alone to find out? An d I must be alone. Otherwise, if I am 
not alone in the deeper sense of that word, I am just repe ating what Sankara, 
Buddha, or X, Y, Z said. What is the poi nt of it, knowing very well that repetition 
is not the real? So, must not I—mature, or immature, or half mature—must not 
they all learn to stand alone? It is pain ful; they say, “My God, how can I stand 
alone?”—to be without the children, to be without God, to  be without the 
Commissar? There is fear. 
 
Swamiji:  Do you think that ever y one can work out this? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Why not, Sir? If you cannot, then  you are caught in it. Then no 
amount of Gods, and mantra s, and tricks will help you. They may cover it up. 
They may bottle it up. They may suppress it and put it in the refrigerator. But it is 
always there. 
 
Swamiji:  Now there is the other method, that  of standing alone: Raja Yoga. The 
student here is again asked to cultivate certain virtuous qualities which, on the 
one hand, make of him a good citizen  and on the other, remove possible psychological barriers. This Sadhana , which is mainly awareness of thought 
which includes memory, imagination and sleep, seems to  be close to your own 
teaching. Asana  and Pranayama  are auxiliaries, perhaps. And even the Dhyana 
of Yoga is not intended to bring about self-realization, which is admittedly not 
the end-product of a series of actions. Krishna clearly says that Yoga clarifies 
perception: “ Atma Shuddhaye ”. Do you approve of this  approach? There is not 
much of help involved here; even Iswara is only “ Purusha Visheshaha ”. It is a 
sort of a guru, invisible in the indwelling proc ess. Do you a pprove of this 
approach: there is this method of sitting in  meditation and trying to delve deeper 
and deeper. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Certainly. Then one has to go into the question of meditation. 
 
Swamiji:  And Patanjali defines meditation as, “The absence of all world idea or 
any extraneous idea.” That is the “ Bhakti Sunyam ”. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Look, Sir, I have not read anything. Now here I am: I know nothing. 
I only know that I am in sorrow and that I have got a fairly good mind. I have no 
authority—Sankara, Krishna, Patanjali, nobody—I am absolutely alone. I have 
got to face my life and I have got to be a good citizen—not  according to the 
Communists, Capitalists, or Socialists. Good citizenship means behaviour, which 
is not one thing in the office and different  at home. First, I want to find out how 
to be free of this sorrow. Then being free,  I shall find out if th ere is such a thing 
as God or whatever it is. So how am I to learn to be free of this enormous 
burden? That is my first question. I ca n only understand it in relationship with 
another. I cannot sit by myse lf and dig into it becaus e I may pervert it; my mind 
is too silly, prejudiced. So, I have to fi nd out in relationship—with nature, with 
human beings—what is this fe ar, this sorrow; in relationship, because if I sit by 
myself I can deceive myself very easily . But by being awake in relationship, I 
can spot it immediately. 
 
Swamiji:  If you are alert. 
 
KRISHNAJI : That is the point. If I am alert, watchful, I shall find out; and that 
does not take time. 
 
Swamiji:  But if one is not? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Therefore, the problem is  to be awake, to be aw are, alert. Is there a 
method for it? Follow it, Sir. If there is a method which will help me to be aware, 
I shall practise it; but is that awareness?  Because in that is involved routine, 
acceptance of authority, repetition; that is gradually making my alertness dull. So 
I reject that: the practice of alertness. I say I can only understand sorrow in 
relationship and that understanding comes only through alertness. Therefore, I 
must be alert. I am alert because my de mand is to end sorrow. Therefore I must 
be alert. If I am hungry, I want food and I go after food. In  the same way, I discover the enormous burden of sorrow in me and I discover it through 
relationship—how I behave with you, how I talk to pe ople. In that process of 
relationship, this thing is revealed. 
 
Swamiji:  In that relationship you are all the time self-aware, if I may put it that 
way. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Yes, I am aware, alert, watching. 
 
Swamiji:  Is it so easy for an ordinary person? 
 
KRISHNAJI : It is, if the man is se rious and says, “I want to  find out.” The ordinary 
man, eighty to ninety per cent of them, is  not really interest ed. But the man who 
is serious, he says, “I shall find out—I want to see if the mind can be free from 
sorrow.” And it is only possibl e to discover it in relationship. I cannot invent 
sorrow. In relationship sorrow comes. 
 
Swamiji:  The sorrow is within. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Naturally, Sir, it is a ps ychological phenomenon. 
 
Swamiji:  You would not want man to sit and meditate and sharpen? 
 
KRISHNAJI : So let us come back to the question of meditation. What is 
meditation?—not according to what Patanja li and others say be cause they may be 
totally mistaken. And I might  be mistaken when I say I know how to meditate. 
So one has oneself to fi nd out, one has to ask, “What is meditation?” Is 
meditation sitting quiet, concentrating, controlling thought, watching? 
 
Swamiji:  Watching, perhaps. 
 
KRISHNAJI : You can watch when you are walking. 
 
Swamiji:  It is difficult. 
 
KRISHNAJI : You watch while eating,  when you are listening to people, when 
somebody says something that hurts you, flatters you. That means, you have to 
be alert all the time—when you are ex aggerating, when you are telling half-
truths—you follow? To watch, you need a very quiet mind. That is meditation. 
The whole of that is meditation. 
 
Swamiji:  To me it looks as though Patanjali evolved an exercise for quietening 
the mind, not on the battlefield of life, but to start it when you are alone and then 
extend it to relationship. 
 
KRISHNAJI : But if you escape from the battle... Swamiji:  For a little while... 
 
KRISHNAJI : If you escape from the battle you ha ve not understood the battle. The 
battle is you. How can you escape from yourself? You can take a drug, you can 
pretend that you have escaped, you can repeat mantra s, japas and do all kinds of 
things, but the battle is going on. You sa y, “Get away quietly from it and then 
come back to it.” That is a fragmentation. We are sugge sting: “Look at the battle 
you are involved in; you are caught in it: you are it.” 
 
Swamiji:  That leads us to the last discipline: you are it . 
 
KRISHNAJI : You are the battle. 
 
Swamiji:  You are it, you are the battle, you ar e the fighter, you are away from it, 
you are with it—everything. That is pe rhaps what is imp lied in Gnana Yoga. 
According to Gnana Yoga, th e seeker is asked to equi p himself with the four 
means: Viveka , seeking the real and discarding the false; Vairagya, not seeking 
pleasure; Shat Satsampath, which meant in effect living a life conducive to the 
practice of this yoga; and Mumukshutva , a total dedication to the search of Truth. 
The disciple then approached a guru and his Sadhana  consisted of Sravana  
(hearing), Manana  (reflection) and Niryudhyajna  (assimilation), which all of us 
do here. The guru  adopted various means to enlighten the student, which usually 
implied the realization of the All or the Whole Being.  Sankara describes it thus: 
“The infinite alone is real, the world is  unreal. The individual is non-different 
from the infinite, so there is no fragmenta tion there.” Sankara said that the world 
is Maya by which he meant that the world-appearance is not the real, which one 
has to investigate and discover. Krishna describes it thus in the Gita: “The yogi is then aware that the action, the doer of the action, th e instruments involved, and 
the object towards which the action is directed, are all one whole and thus 
fragmentation is overcome.” 
How do you react to this Gnana Yo ga method? First there is this Sadhana 
Chaturdhyaya , for which the disciple prepares  himself. Then he goes to the guru 
and sits and hears the Truth from the guru and reflects over it and assimilates the 
truth, till it becomes one with him; and the truth is usually said in terms of these formulas. But these formulas that we repeat are supposed to be realized. Has this perhaps some validity? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Sir, if you have read none of these—Patanjali, Sankara, Chan 
Upanishads, Raja Yoga, Karma Yoga, Bh akti Yoga, Gnana Yoga, nothing—what 
would you do? 
 
Swamiji:  I shall have to find out. 
 
KRISHNAJI : What would you do? 
 
Swamiji:  Struggle. KRISHNAJI : Which you are doing anyhow. Wh at would you do? Where would 
you start?—knowing nothing about what others have said, including what the 
Communist leaders have said—Marx, En gels, Lenin, Stalin. I am here, an 
ordinary human being, I have not read a thing, I want to know. Where am I to 
begin? I have to work—Karma Yoga—in a garden, as a cook, in a factory, an 
office, I have to work. And also there are the wife and children: I love them, I 
hate them, I am a sexual addict, because th at is the only escape offered to me in 
life. Here I am. That is my map of life and I start from here. I cannot start from 
over there; I start here and I ask myself what it is all about. I know nothing about 
God. You can invent, pretend: I have a horror of pretending. If I do not know, I 
do not know. I am not going to quote Sankara, Buddha, or  anybody. So I say: this 
is where I start. Can I bring about orde r in my life?—order, not invented by me 
or by them, but order that is virtue. Can I bring it about? And to be virtuous there 
must be no battle, no conflict in me or  outside. Therefore, there must be no 
aggressiveness, no violence, no hate, no an imosity. I start from there. And I find 
out I am afraid. I must be free of fear. To be conscious of it is to be aware of all 
this, aware of where I am; from there I will move, I sha ll work. And then I find 
out I can be alone—not carry all the burdens of memory, of Sankaras, of 
Buddhas, Marx, Engels—you follow? I can be alone because I have understood 
order in my life; and I have understood  order because I have denied disorder, 
because I have learnt about disorder. Di sorder means conflict, acceptance of 
authority, complying, imitation,  all that. That is disord er, the social morality is 
disorder. Out of that I will bring order in myself; not myse lf as a potty little 
human being in a backyard, but as a Human Being. 
 
Swamiji:  How do you explain it? 
 
KRISHNAJI : It is a human being who is going  through this hell. Every human 
being is going through this he ll. So if I, as a human being, understand this, I have 
discovered something which a ll human beings can discover. 
 
Swamiji:  But how does one know that one is not deceiving oneself? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Very simple. First, humility: I do not want to ach ieve anything. 
 
Swamiji:  I do not know if you have come across people who say, “I am the 
humblest person in the world.” 
 
KRISHNAJI : I know. That is all too silly. Not to desire achievement is not. 
 
Swamiji:  When one is in it, in the soup, how does one know? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Of course you will know. When your  desire says, “I must be like Mr. 
Smith who is the Prime Minister, the Gene ral, or the Execu tive Officer”, then 
there is the beginning of arrogance, prid e, achievement. I know when I want to 
be like the hero, when I want to become  like the Buddha, when I want to reach enlightenment, when desire says, “Be something.” Desire says in being 
something there is tremendous pleasure. 
 
Swamiji:  But have we still tackled the r oot of the problem in all this? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Of course we have. “Me” is the r oot of the problem. Self-centredness 
is the root of the problem. 
 
Swamiji:  But what is it? What does it mean? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Self-centredness? I am more im portant than you, my house, my 
property, my achievement, “me” first. 
 
Swamiji:  But the martyr may say, “I am nothing, I can be shot.” 
 
KRISHNAJI : Who?—they do not. 
 
Swamiji:  They may say they are completely unselfish, selfless. 
 
KRISHNAJI : No, Sir, I am not interested in what somebody else says. 
 
Swamiji:  He may be bluffing himself. 
 
KRISHNAJI : As long as I am quite clear in myself, I am not deceiving myself. I 
can deceive myself the moment I have a measure. When I compare myself with 
the man with a Rolls-Royce, or with the Buddha, I have a measure. Comparing 
myself with somebody is the beginning of illusion. When I do not compare—
why should I?—I move from there. 
 
Swamiji:  To be the Self? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Whatever I am; which is: I am ugl y, I am full of anger, deception, 
fear, this and that. I start from there and see if it is at all possible to be free of all 
this. My thinking about God is like thin king about climbing those hills, which I 
never will. 
 
Swamiji:  But even so you said something ve ry interesting the other day: the 
individual and the collectiv e are one. How does the individual realize that unity 
with the collective? 
 
KRISHNAJI : But that is a fact. Here I am livin g in Gstaad; somebo dy is living in 
India, it is the same problem, the same  anxiety, the same fear—only different 
expressions but the root of the thing is the same. That is one point. Second, the 
environment has produced this individuality and the indi viduality has created the 
environment. My greed has created this rotten society.  My anger, my hatred, the fragmentation of my life has created the nation and all this mess. So I am the 
world, the world is me. Logically, intellectually, verbally, it is so. 
 
Swamiji:  But how does one feel it? 
 
KRISHNAJI : That comes only when you change . When you change, you are no 
longer a national. You do not belong to anything. 
 
Swamiji:  Mentally I may say I am not a Hindu, or I am not an Indian. 
 
KRISHNAJI : But, Sir, that is just a trick. You must feel it in your blood. 
 
Swamiji:  Please explain what that means. 
 
KRISHNAJI : It means, Sir, when you see the danger of nationalism, you are out of 
it. When you see the danger of fragmen tation, you no longer belong to the 
fragment. We do not see the danger of it. That is all. 
 
SAANEN  
JULY 1969 2 
 
 
J. KRISHNAMURTI AND  
SWAMI VENKATESANANDA  
 
 
Four “mahavakyas” from the Upanishads discussed. 
Communication and the Bodhisattva ideal. 
Vedanta and the ending of knowledge. 
 
 
Swami Venkatesananda:  Krishnaji, we are sitting near  each other and enquiring, 
listening and learning. Even so did the sage  and the seeker, and that is the origin 
they say of the Upanisha ds. These Upanishads contain what are known as 
Mahavakyas, Great Sayings, which perhaps had the same effect upon the seeker 
then as your words have upon me now. May I beg of you to say what you think 
of them, are they still valid, or do they need revision or renewal? 
The Upanishads envisaged the Trut h in the following Mahavakyas: 
 
Prajnanam Brahma:  “Consciousness is infinite , the absolute, the highest 
Truth.” 
Aham Brahmasmi:  “I am that infinite”, or “I is that infinite”—because the “I” 
here does not refer to the ego. 
Tat Tvam-asi:  “Thou art that”. 
Ayam Atma Brahma:  “The self is the infinite”, or “the individual is the 
infinite.” 
 
These were the four Mahava kyas used by th e ancient sage to bring home the 
message to the student, and they were also sitting just like us , face to face, the 
guru and the disciple, the sage and the seeker. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Yes, what is the question, Sir? 
 
Swamiji:  What do you think of them? Are th ese Mahavakyas valid now? Do they 
need a revision or a renewal? 
 
KRISHNAJI : These sayings, like “I am that”,  “Tat Tvam-asi” and “Ayam Atma 
Brahma”? 
 
Swamiji:  That is, “Consciousness is Brahman”. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Isn’t there a danger, Sir, of repeat ing something not knowing what it 
means? “I am that.” What does it actually mean? 
 
Swamiji:  “Thou are that.” KRISHNAJI : “Thou art that.” What does that m ean? One can say, “I am the river”. 
That river that has got tremendous volume behind it, moving, restless, pushing on 
and on, through many countries. I can say,  “I am that rive r.” That would be 
equally valid as, “I am Brahman.” 
 
Swamiji:  Yes. Yes. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Why do we say, “I am that”? And not “I am the river,” nor “I am the 
poor man”, the man that has no capac ity, no intelligence,  who is dull—this 
dullness brought about by heredity, by poverty, by degradatio n, all that! Why 
don’t we say, “I am that also”? Why do we always attach ourselves to something 
which we suppose to be the highest? 
 
Swamiji:  “That”, perhaps, only means that which is unconditioned. 
YO VAI BHUMA TATSUKHAM1
That which is unconditioned. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Unconditioned, yes. 
 
Swamiji:  So, since there is in us this urge  to break through all conditioning, we 
look for the unconditioned. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Can a conditioned mind, can a mind that is small, petty, narrow, 
living on superficial entertainments, can th at know or conceive, or understand, or 
feel, or observe the unconditioned? 
 
Swamiji:  No. But it can uncondition itself. 
 
KRISHNAJI : That is all it can do. 
 
Swamiji:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Not say, “There is the unconditi oned, I am going to think about it”, 
or “I am that”. My point is, why is it that we always associate ourselves with 
what we think is the highest? No t what we think is the lowest? 
 
Swamiji:  Perhaps in Brahman there is no di vision between th e highest and the 
lowest, that which is unconditioned. 
 
KRISHNAJI : That’s the point. When you say, “I am that”, or “Thou are that”, there 
is a statement of a supposed fact... 
 
Swamiji:  Yes. 
                                                 
1 
  KRISHNAJI : ...which may not be a fact at all. 
 
Swamiji:  Perhaps I should explain here ag ain that the sage who uttered the 
Mahavakyas was believed to have had a direct experience of it. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Now, if he had the experience of it, could he convey it to another? 
 
Swamiji:  (Laughs ) 
 
KRISHNAJI : And the question also arises, can one actually experience something 
which is not experienceable? We use th e word “experience” so easily—“realize”, 
“experience”, “attain”, “self-realization” , all these things—can one actually 
experience the feeling of su preme ecstasy? Let’s take that for the moment, that 
word. Can one experience it? 
 
Swamiji:  The infinite? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Can one experience the infinite? Th is is really quite a fundamental 
question, not only here but in life. We can experience something which we have 
already known. I experience meeting you. That’s an e xperience, meeting you, or 
you meeting me, or my meeting X. And when I meet you next time I recognize 
you, don’t I? I say, “Yes, I met him at Gstaad.” So there is in experience the 
factor of recognition. 
 
Swamiji:  Yes. That is objective experience. 
 
KRISHNAJI : If I hadn’t met you, I should pa ss you by—you would pass me by. 
There is in all experiencing, isn’t there, a factor of recognition? 
 
Swamiji:  Possibly. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Otherwise it is not an experience. I meet you—is that an experience? 
 
Swamiji:  Objective experience. 
 
KRISHNAJI : It can be an experience, can’t it? I meet you for the first time. Then 
what takes place in that first meeti ng of two people. What takes place? 
 
Swamiji:  An impression, impression of like. 
 
KRISHNAJI : An impression of like or dislike,  such as, “He’s a very intelligent 
man”, or “He’s a stupid man”, or “He should  be this or that”. It is all based on 
my background of judgment, on my valu es, on my prejudices, likes and dislikes, 
on my bias, on my conditioning. That background meets you and judges you. The judgment, the evaluation, is what we call experience. 
 Swamiji:  But isn’t there, Krishnaji, another...? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Wait, Sir, let me finish this. Experi ence is after all the response to a 
challenge, isn’t it? The reaction to a challenge. I meet you and I react. If I didn’t 
react at all, with any sense of like, di slike, prejudice, what would take place? 
 
Swamiji:  Yes? 
 
KRISHNAJI : What would happen in a rela tionship in which the one—you, 
perhaps—have no prejudice, no reaction; you are living in quite a different state 
and you meet me. Then what takes place? 
 
Swamiji:  Peace. 
 
KRISHNAJI : I must recognize that peace in y ou, that quality in you, otherwise I 
just pass you by. So when we say, “Expe rience the highest”, can the mind, which 
is conditioned, which is prejudiced, frightened, experience the highest? 
 
Swamiji:  Obviously not. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Obviously not. And the fear, the prejudice, the excitement, the 
stupidity is the entity that says, “I am going to experience the highest.” When that stupidity, fear, anxiety, conditioning  ceases, is there experiencing of the 
highest at all? 
 
Swamiji:  Experiencing of “that”. 
 
KRISHNAJI : No, I haven’t made myself clear. If the entity—which is the fear, the 
anxiety, the guilt and all the rest of it—if that entity has dissolved itself, 
discarded the fear and so on, what is there to experience? 
 
Swamiji:  Now that beautiful question was actua lly put in just so many words. He 
asked the very same question: 
VIJNATARAM ARE KENA VIJANIYAT1
“You are the knower, how can you k now the knower?” “You are the 
experiences!” But there is one suggestion that Vedanta gives and that is: we have so far been talking about an objective experience: 
PAROKSANUBHUTI2
Isn’t there another experience? Not my me eting X Y Z, but the feeling “I am”, 
which is not because I encountered de sire somewhere, or because I was 
confronted with some desire. I don’t go and ask a doctor or somebody to certify 
                                                 
1 
  
2 
  that “I am”. But there is this feeling, there is this knowle dge, “I am”. This 
experience seems to be totally di fferent from objective experience. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Sir, what is the purpose of experience? 
 
Swamiji:  Exactly what you have been saying: to  get rid of the fears, and get rid of 
all the complexes, all the conditioning. To see what I am, in truth, when I am not 
conditioned. 
 
KRISHNAJI : No, Sir. I mean: I am dull. 
 
Swamiji:  Am I dull? 
 
KRISHNAJI : I am dull; and because I see you, or X Y Z, who is very bright, very 
intelligent...? 
 
Swamiji:  There is comparison. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Comparison: through comparing, I find that I am very dull. And I 
say, “Yes, I am dull, what am I to do?”, and just rema in in my dullness. Life 
comes along, an incident takes place, which shakes me up. I wake up for a 
moment and struggle—struggle not to be du ll, to be more intelligent, and so on. 
So experience generally has the signifi cance of waking you up, giving you a 
challenge to which you have to respond. Either you respond to it adequately, or 
inadequately. If it is inadequate, the response then be comes a medium of pain, 
struggle, conflict. But if you respond to it adequately, that is fully, you are the 
challenge. You are the challenge, not the challenged, but you are that. Therefore 
you need no challenge at all, if you ar e adequately responding all the time to 
everything. 
 
Swamiji:  That is beautiful, but ( laughing ) how does one get there? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Ah, wait, Sir. Just let us see the need  for experience at all. I think it is 
really extraordinary, if you can go into it. Why do human beings demand not 
only objective experience, which one can understand—in going to the moon they 
have collected a lot of in formation, a lot of data... 
 
Swamiji:  ...rocks... 
 
KRISHNAJI : That kind of experience is pe rhaps necessary, b ecause it furthers 
knowledge, knowledge of factual, objec tive things. Now apart from that kind of 
experience, is there any necessity for experience at all? 
 
Swamiji:  Subjectively? 
 KRISHNAJI : Yes. I don’t like to use “subjectiv e” and “objective”. Is there the 
need of experience at all? We have said: experience is the response to a 
challenge. I challenge you, I ask, “Why?”  You may respond to it, and say, “Yes, 
perfectly right, I am with you.” “Why?”  But the moment there is any kind of 
resistance to that question, “Why?”, yo u are already responding inadequately. 
And therefore there is conflict betwee n us, between the challenge and the 
response. Now, that’s one thing. And ther e is a desire to experience, let’s say 
God, something Supreme, the highest; or  the highest happin ess, the highest 
ecstasy, bliss, a sense of peace, whatever you like. Can the mind experience it at 
all? 
 
Swamiji:  No. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Then what does experience it? 
 
Swamiji:  Do you want us to enquire what the mind is? 
 
KRISHNAJI : No. 
 
Swamiji:  What the “I” is? 
 
KRISHNAJI : No! Why does the “I”, me or you,  demand experience?—that is my 
point—demand the experience of the hi ghest, which promises happiness, or 
ecstasy, bliss or peace? 
 
Swamiji:  Obviously because in the present state we feel inadequate. 
 
KRISHNAJI : That’s all. That’s all. 
 
Swamiji:  Correct. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Being in a state in which there is no peace, we want to experience a 
state which is absolute, permanent, eternal peace. 
 
Swamiji:  It is not so much that I am restless , and there is a state of peace; I want 
to know what is this feeling, “I am restless”. Is the “I” restless, or is the “I” dull? 
Am I dull, or is dullness only a condition which I can shake off? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Now who is the entity that shakes it off? 
 
Swamiji:  Wakes up. The “I” wakes up. 
 
KRISHNAJI : No, Sir. That’s the difficulty. Let’ s finish this first. I am unhappy, 
miserable, laden with sorrow. And I want to experience someth ing where there is 
no sorrow. That is my craving. I have an  ideal, a goal, and by struggling towards 
it I will ultimately get that. That’s my craving. I want to  experience that and hold on to that experience. That  is what human beings want —apart from all the clever 
sayings, clever talk. 
 
Swamiji:  Yes, yes; and that is perhaps th e reason why another very great South 
Indian sage said (in Tamil): 
ASAI ARUMIN ASAI ARUMIN  
ISANODAYINUM ASAI ARUMIN1
It’s very good really. 
 
KRISHNAJI : What’s that? 
 
Swamiji:  “Cut down all these crav ings. Even the craving to be one with God, cut 
it down”, he says. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Yes, I understand. Now look, Si r. If I—if the mind—can free itself 
from this agony, then  what is the need of aski ng for an experience of the 
Supreme? There won’t be. 
 
Swamiji:  No. Certainly. 
 
KRISHNAJI : It is no longer caught in its own conditioning. Therefore it is 
something else; it is living in a different dimension. Therefore the desire to 
experience the highest is essentially  wrong. 
 
Swamiji:  If it is a desire. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Whatever it is! How do I know th e highest? Because the sages have 
talked of it? I don’t accept the sages. They might be caught in illusion, they 
might be talking sense or nonsense. I don’ t know; I am not interested. I find that 
as long as the mind is in a state of fear, it wants to escape from it, and it projects 
an idea of the Supreme, and wants to expe rience that. But if it frees itself from its 
own agony, then it is altogether in a diffe rent state. It doesn’t even ask for the 
experience because it is at a different level. 
 
Swamiji:  Quite, quite. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Now, why do the sages, according to  what you have said, say, “You 
must experience that, you must be  that, you must realize that”? 
 
Swamiji:  They didn’t sa y, “You must”... 
 
                                                 
1 
  KRISHNAJI : Put it any way you like.  Why should they say all these things? Would 
it not be better to say, “Look here, my friends, get rid of your fear. Get rid of 
your beastly antagonism, get rid of your  childishness, and when you have done 
that...” 
 
Swamiji:  ...nothing more remains. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Nothing more. You’ll fi nd out the beauty of it.  You don’t have to 
ask, then. 
 
Swamiji:  Fantastic, fantastic! 
 
KRISHNAJI : You see, Sir, the other way is such  a hypocritical st ate; it leads to 
hypocrisy. “I am seeking God”, but I am all the time kicking people. ( Laughs ) 
 
Swamiji:  Yes, that could be hypocrisy. 
 
KRISHNAJI : It is, it is. 
 
Swamiji:  That leads me on to the last and perhaps very impertinent question. 
 
KRISHNAJI : No, Sir, there is no impertinence. 
 
Swamiji:  I am neither flattering you, nor in sulting you, Krishnaji, when I say that 
it is a great experience to sit near you an d talk to you like th is. Your message is 
great, and you have been talking for over forty years of things you have 
considered very important to man. Now three questions . Do you think a man can 
communicate it to another man? Do you th ink that others can communicate it to 
still others? If so, how? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Communicate what, Sir? 
 
Swamiji:  This message, that you have dedi cated your life to. What would you 
call it?—You may call it message. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Yes, call it what you like, it doesn ’t matter. Am I—the person who is 
speaking, is he conveying a message, telling you a message? 
 
Swamiji:  No. You may call it an awakening, a questioning... 
 
KRISHNAJI : No no. I am asking, Sir. Just look at it. 
 
Swamiji:  I guess we feel so, the listeners... 
 
KRISHNAJI : What is he saying? He says , “Look, look at yourself.” 
 Swamiji:  Exactly. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Nothing more. 
 
Swamiji:  Nothing more is necessary. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Nothing more is necessary. Look at yourself. Observe yourself. Go 
into yourself, because in th is state as we are, we will create a monstrous world. 
You may go to the Moon, you may go furt her, to Venus, Mars and all the rest of 
it, but you will always carry yourself over there. Change yourself first! Change 
yourself—not first—change yourself. Ther efore to change, look at yourself, go 
into yourself—observe, listen, learn. That’s not a message. You can do it 
yourself if you want to. 
 
Swamiji:  But somebody has to tell... 
 
KRISHNAJI : I am  telling you. I say, “Look, look at  this marvellous tree; look at 
this beautiful African flower.” 
 
Swamiji:  Till you said that, I hadn’t looked at it. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Ah! Why? 
 
Swamiji:  (Laughs ) 
 
KRISHNAJI : Why? It is there, round you. 
 
Swamiji:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Why didn’t you look? 
 
Swamiji:  There could be a thousand answers. 
 
KRISHNAJI : No, no. I asked you to look at that flower. By my asking you to look 
at that flower, do you look at that flower? 
 
Swamiji:  I have the opportunity, yes. 
 
KRISHNAJI : No. Do you really look  at that flower because  somebody asks you to 
look? 
 
Swamiji:  No. 
 
KRISHNAJI : No, you can’t. That’s just it. I sa y to you, “You ar e hungry.” Are you 
hungry because I say it? 
 Swamiji:  No. 
 
KRISHNAJI : You know when you are hungry, a nd yet you want somebody to tell 
you to look at the flower. 
 
Swamiji:  I may know when I am hungry, but it is the mother that tells me where 
the food is. 
 
KRISHNAJI : No, no. We’re not talking about wher e the food is, but we are saying 
“hunger”. You know when you’re hungry. But why shoul d somebody tell you to 
look at a flower? 
 
Swamiji:  Because I am not hungry to look at the flower. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Why not? 
 
Swamiji:  I am satisfied with something else. 
 
KRISHNAJI : No. Why aren’t you looking at that flower? I think first of all nature 
has no value at all for most of us. We sa y, “Well, I can see the tree any time I 
want to.” That’s one thing. Also, we are so concentrated up on our own worries, 
our own hopes, our own desires and experiences, that we shut ourselves in a cage 
of our own thinking; and we don’t look beyond it. He says, “Don’t do that. Look 
at everything and through looking at everything you’ll discover your cage.” 
That’s all. 
 
Swamiji:  Isn’t that a message? 
 
KRISHNAJI : It is not a message in the sense... 
 
Swamiji:  No. 
 
KRISHNAJI : It doesn’t matter what you call it—call it a message. All right. I tell 
you that. You play with it, or take it very  seriously. And if it is very serious for 
you, you naturally tell it to  somebody else. You don’t ha ve to say, “I am going to 
make propaganda about it...” 
 
Swamiji:  No, no. 
 
KRISHNAJI : You will say, “Look at the beauty of those flowers.” 
 
Swamiji:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAJI : You say that. And the person does n’t listen to you. And there it is—
finished! So is propaganda necessary? 
 Swamiji:  Propagation, Sir. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Yes, propagation, that is the word—propagate. 
 
Swamiji:  Yes. We are talking about th ese forty years of talking... 
 
KRISHNAJI : ...more than forty years... 
 
Swamiji:  Yes, millions of people have been talking for centuries, wasting their... 
 
KRISHNAJI : We have been talking, yes. We have been propagating... 
 
Swamiji:  ...something which is ex tremely important, which I’m sure you consider 
is extremely important. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Otherwise I wouldn’t go on. 
 
Swamiji:  I have read some of the books you have published, but  this experience 
of sitting and talking to you... 
 
KRISHNAJI : ...is different from reading a book. 
 
Swamiji:  Completely, completely, different! 
 
KRISHNAJI : I agree. 
 
Swamiji:  Last night I read on e and there was a little mo re meaning. How does 
one bring that about? 
 
KRISHNAJI : You are a serious person, and the other person being serious there is 
a contact, there is a relationship, there is  a coming together in seriousness. But if 
you’re not serious, you will just say, “We ll, it’s very nice talking about all these 
things, but what’s it al l about?”—and walk off. 
 
Swamiji:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Surely, Sir, with any kind of rela tionship that has meaning there must 
be a meeting at the same level, at th e same time, with the same intensity, 
otherwise there is no communication, there is no relationship. And perhaps that’s 
what takes place when we are sitting to gether here. Because one feels the 
urgency of something and the intensity of  it, there is a relationship established 
which is quite different from reading a book. 
 
Swamiji:  A book has no life. 
 KRISHNAJI : Printed words have no life, but y ou can give life to the printed word 
if you are serious. 
 
Swamiji:  So how does it go on from there? 
 
KRISHNAJI : From there you say, is it possible to convey to others this quality of 
urgency, this quality of intensity , and action which takes place now? 
 
Swamiji:  ...really now... 
 
KRISHNAJI : Yes, not tomorrow or yesterday. 
 
Swamiji:  Action, which means observation at the same level. 
 
KRISHNAJI : And is always functioning—seeing an d acting, seeing, acting, seeing, 
acting. 
 
Swamiji:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAJI : How is this to take place? First of  all, Sir, most people, as we said 
yesterday, are not interested in all this. They play with it. There are very, very 
few really serious people. Ninety-five per ce nt say, “Well, if you are entertaining 
it’s all right, but if you are not, you’re  not welcome”—entertainment, according 
to their idea of entertainment. Then what will you do? Knowing there are only 
very, very few people in the world who are really de sperately serious, what will 
you do? You talk to them, a nd you talk to the people wh o want to be entertained. 
But you don’t care whether they listen to you or don’t listen. 
 
Swamiji:  Thank you. Thank you. 
 
KRISHNAJI : I don’t say, “To the people who need crutches, offer crutches!” 
 
Swamiji:  No. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Nor to the people who want comfor t, an avenue of escape, “Go away 
somewhere else...” 
 
Swamiji:  ...to the Palace Hotel!... 
 
KRISHNAJI : I think, Sir, that is perhaps what has taken plac e in all these religions, 
all the so-called teachers. They have said, “I must help this man, that man, that 
other man.” 
 
Swamiji:  Yes? 
 KRISHNAJI : The ignorant, the semi-ignorant, an d the very intellig ent. Each must 
have his particular form of  food. They may have said that; I am not concerned. I 
just offer the flower, let them smell it, let them destroy it, let them cook it, let 
them tear it to pieces. I have nothing to do with it. 
 
Swamiji:  Well, they glorify that other attitude, the Bodhisattva ideal. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Again, the Bodhisattva ideal—is it not an invention of our own, the 
desperate hope, desire for some kind of solace? The Maitrey a Bodhisattva, the 
idea that He has relinquished the ultimate in life, enlightenment, and is waiting 
for all humanity... 
 
Swamiji:  Thank you. 
* * * 
KRISHNAJI : What is Vedanta? 
 
Swamiji:  The word means, “The end of the Vedas”... Not in the manner of “full 
stop”. 
 
KRISHNAJI : The end of all knowledge. 
 
Swamiji:  Quite right, quite right. Yes, the end of knowledge; where knowledge 
matters no more. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Therefore, leave it. 
 
Swamiji:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Why proceed from there to describe what it is not? 
 
Swamiji:  As I’ve been sitting and listening to you, I’ve thought of another sage 
who is reported to have gone to another greater one . And he says, “Look my 
mind is restless; please tell me what mu st I do.” And the older man says, “Give 
me a list of what you know already, so that I can proceed from there.” He replies, 
“Oh, it will take a long time, because I have all the formulas, all the shastras, all 
of that.” The sage answers, “But that’s  only a set of words. All those words are 
contained in the dictionary, it means noth ing. Now what do yo u know?” He says, 
“That is what I know. I do n’t know anything else.” 
 
KRISHNAJI : Vedanta, as it says, me ans the end of knowledge. 
 
Swamiji:  Yes, it’s wonderful, I never heard it put that way before. “The end of 
knowledge.” 
 
KRISHNAJI : Freedom from knowledge. Swamiji:  Yes indeed. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Then why have they not kept to that? 
 
Swamiji:  Their contention is that you have to pass through it in order to come out 
of it. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Pass through what? 
 
Swamiji:  Through all this knowledge, all this muck, and then discard it. 
PARIVEDYA LOKAN LOKAJITAN  
BRAHMANO NIRVEDAMAYAT1
That is, “After examining all these things and finding that they are of no use to 
you, then you must step out of it.” 
 
KRISHNAJI : Then why must I acquire it? If Ve danta means the end of knowledge, 
which the word itself means,  the ending of Vedas, which is knowledge—then 
why should I go through all the laborious  process of acquiring knowledge, and 
then discarding it? 
 
Swamiji:  Otherwise you wouldn’t be in Ve danta. The end of knowledge is, 
having acquired this knowledge, coming to the end of it. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Why should I acquire it? 
 
Swamiji:  Well, so that it can be ended. 
 
KRISHNAJI : No, no. Why should I acquire it? Why should not I, from the very 
beginning, see what knowle dge is and discard it? 
 
Swamiji:  See what knowledge is? 
 
KRISHNAJI : And discard, discard all that: never accumulate. Vedanta means the 
end of accumulating knowledge. 
 
Swamiji:  That’s it. That’s correct. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Then why should I accumulate? 
 
Swamiji:  Pass through, perhaps. 
 
                                                 
1 
  KRISHNAJI : Pass through? Why should I? I k now fire burns. I know when I am 
hungry, when I must eat. I know I mustn’ t hit you; I don’t hit you. I don’t go 
through the process of hitting you, ac quiring the knowledge that I’ll be hurt 
again. So each day I discar d. I free myself from what I have learnt, every minute. 
So every minute is the end of knowledge. 
 
Swamiji:  Yes, right. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Now you and I accept that, that is a fact, that’s the only way to live—
otherwise you can’t live. Then why have they said, “You must go through all the 
knowledge, through all this?” Why don’t they tell me, “Look my friend, as you 
live from day to day acquiring knowledge, end it each day”? Not “Vedanta says 
so and so”. 
 
Swamiji:  No, no. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Live it! 
 
Swamiji:  Quite right. Again this division, classification. 
 
KRISHNAJI : That’s just it. We are back again. 
 
Swamiji:  Back again. 
 
KRISHNAJI : We’re back again to a fragm ent—a fragmentation of life. 
 
Swamiji:  Yes. But I’m too dull, I can’t get ther e; so I’d rather acquire all this... 
 
KRISHNAJI : Yes, and then discard it. 
 
Swamiji:  In the religious or spiritual history of India, there have been sages who 
were born sages: the Ramana Maharishi, the Shuka Maharishi, etc. etc. Well, 
they were allowed to discard knowledge even before acquiring  it. And in their 
cases of course, the usual argument was that they had done it all... 
 
KRISHNAJI : In their past lives. 
 
Swamiji:  Past lives. 
 
KRISHNAJI : No, Sir, apart from the acquiring of knowledge and the ending of 
knowledge, what does Vedanta say? 
 
Swamiji:  Vedanta describes the relationship between the individual and the 
Cosmic. 
 
KRISHNAJI : The Eternal. Swamiji:  The Cosmic, or the Infinite, or whatever it is. It starts well: 
ISAVASYAM IDAM SARVAM  
YAT KIMCHA JAGATYAM JAGAT1
“Till the whole universe is pervaded by that one...” 
 
KRISHNAJI : That one thing... 
 
Swamiji:  ...and so on. And then it’s mostly this, a dialogue between a master and 
his disciple. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Sir, isn’t it extraordinary, there has always been in India this teacher 
and disciple, teacher and disciple? 
 
Swamiji:  Yes—Guru. 
 
KRISHNAJI : But they never said, “You are th e teacher as well as the pupil.” 
 
Swamiji:  Occasionally they did. 
 
KRISHNAJI : But always with hesitation, with apprehension. But why?—if the fact 
is, you are the teacher and you are the pupil. Otherwise you are lost, if you 
depend on anybody else. That’s one fact . And also I would lik e to ask why, in 
songs, in Hindu literature, they have praised the beauty of nature, the trees, the 
flowers, the rivers, the birds. Why is it most people in India have no feeling for 
all that? 
 
Swamiji:  Because they are dead? 
 
KRISHNAJI : Why? And yet they ta lk about the beauty, the literatu re, they quote 
Sanskrit, and Sanskrit itself is the most beautiful language. 
 
Swamiji:  They have no feeling for... 
 
KRISHNAJI : And they have no feeling for the poor man. 
 
Swamiji:  Yes, that is the worst tragedy of all. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Nor for the squalor, the dirt. 
 
Swamiji:  And heaven knows from where they got this idea because it is not 
found in any of the scriptures. That mean s we are repeating the scriptures without 
realizing their meaning. 
 
                                                 
1 
  KRISHNAJI : That’s it. 
 
Swamiji:  Krishna: 
ISVARAH SARVABHUTANAM  
HRIDDESSERJUNA TISTHATI1
“I am seated in the hearts of all beings .” Nobody bothers about the hearts of all 
beings. What would you thin k is the cause? They repe at it daily, every morning 
they are asked to repeat a chapter of the Bhagavad Gita. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Every morning they do Puja  and the repetition of things. 
 
Swamiji:  Now why have they lost the mean ing? Obviously great meaning was 
put into those words by the authors. We are even asked to repeat them every day 
in order that we might keep them... 
 
KRISHNAJI : Alive. 
 
Swamiji:  Keep them alive. Wh en and how did I kill th e spirit? How was it 
possible? How to prevent it? 
 
KRISHNAJI : What do you think is the reason, Sir? No, you know India better. 
 
Swamiji:  I am shocked at it. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Why do you think it happens ? Is it overpopulation? 
 
Swamiji:  No, overpopulation is a result, not the cause. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Yes. Is it that they have accept ed this tradition, this authority... 
 
Swamiji:  But the tradition says something good. 
 
KRISHNAJI : But they have accepted it. They never questione d it. Sir, I have seen 
M.A.s and B.A.s in India, who have passe d degrees, are clever, brainy—but they 
wouldn’t know how to put a flower on a table. They know nothing but memory, 
memory, the cultivation of memory. Isn’t that one of the causes? 
 
Swamiji:  Perhaps. Mere memorizing. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Memorizing everything. 
 
Swamiji:  Without thinking. Why does man refuse to think? 
 
                                                 
1 
  KRISHNAJI : Oh, that’s different—indolence, fear, wanting always to tread in the 
traditional path so that he doesn’t go wrong. 
 
Swamiji:  But we have discarded the traditio n which they say didn’t suit us. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Of course. But we find a new tradition that suits us—we are safe. 
 
Swamiji:  We never felt that the healthy tradition is a good tradition to keep. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Throw out all tradition! Let’s find  out, Sir, whether these teachers 
and gurus and sages, have r eally helped people. Has Ma rx really helped people? 
 
Swamiji:  No. 
 
KRISHNAJI : They have imposed their ideas on them. 
 
Swamiji:  And others have used the same ideas... 
 
KRISHNAJI : Therefore I question this whole th ing, because they are really not 
concerned with people’s happiness. 
 
Swamiji:  Though they say so. 
 
KRISHNAJI : If the Marxists and all those Soviet leaders are really interested in the 
people  then there would be no concentra tion camps. There would be freedom. 
There would be no repressive measures. 
 
Swamiji:  But I suppose they think, we have to imprison the lunatics... 
 
KRISHNAJI : That’s it. The lunatic is a man who questions my authority. 
 
Swamiji:  Yesterday’s ruler might be today’s lunatic. 
 
KRISHNAJI : That always happens, that’s in evitable, that’s why I’m asking, 
whether it’s not important to make man, a human being, realize that he’s solely 
responsible. 
 
Swamiji:  Each one. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Absolutely! For what he does, what he thinks, how he acts. 
Otherwise we end up in this me morizing, and complete blindness. 
 
Swamiji:  That is your message . And how to nail it? 
 
KRISHNAJI : By driving it in every day ( laughs ). And driving it into oneself. 
Because man is so eager to put his respons ibility on others. The army is the safest escape—you’re told what to  do. You don’t have any responsibility. It’s all been 
thought out, what yo u should do, how you should thin k, act, carry your gun, how 
you should shoot—and finished! They provide you with a meal, sleeping-
quarters, and for sex you can go to the village. That’s th e end of it. And strangely 
they talk about Karma. 
 
Swamiji:  That is Karma. PRARABDHA KARMA1
 
KRISHNAJI : They insist on Karma. 
 
Swamiji:  That is Karma—I was a Brahmin,  and I know what  happened. We 
played with that Karma and then it came back on us. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Playing havoc now in India. 
 
Swamiji:  We toyed with the idea of Karma and we said: it’s your Karma, you 
must suffer. My Karma is good and so I’m  divorced from it all; I’m the landlord. 
And now they have turned the tables. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Quite. 
 
Swamiji:  A vegetarian—she’s a fanatical  vegetarian—asked me, “Is pure 
vegetarianism necessary for yoga practice?” I said, “Not so important. Let’s talk 
about something else.” And she was horri fied. She came back to me and said, 
“How can you say that? You can’t say that  vegetarianism is of secondary value. 
You must say it’s of primary value.” I re plied, “Forgive me—I said something, 
but it doesn’t matter.” I then asked her, “Do you believe in war, defence forces, 
defending your country and so on?” “Yes ,” she said, “otherwise how can we 
live—we have to.” I replied, “If I call you a cannibal, how do you react to that? 
This man kills a small animal  to sustain his life, but you are willing to kill people 
to sustain yours. Like a cannibal.” She didn’t like that—but I think she saw the 
point later. 
 
KRISHNAJI : Good. 
 
Swamiji:  It’s so fantastic. People don’t want to think. And I suppose with you, 
Krishnaji, if you say the truth, you be come very unpopula r. A priest said: 
APRIYASYA TU PATHYASYA VAKTA SROTA NA VIDYATE2
Very beautiful! “People love to hear pleas ant things; pleasant to say and pleasant 
to hear.” 
 
                                                 
1 
  
2 
  SAANEN  
26 JULY 1969  
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDIA  
 
V 
 
Three Talks in Madras 
 
 
1  The art of seeing 
2  Freedom 
3  The sacred 1 
 
 
THE ART OF SEEING  
 
 
To see, not partially but totally. “The act of seeing is the only truth.” 
Of the vast mind only a fragment is used. The fragmentary influence of 
culture, tradition. “Living in a little corner of a distor ted field.” “You 
cannot understand through a fragmen t.” Freedom from “the little 
corner”. The beauty of seeing . 
 
 
We were saying the other day how very important it is to observ e. It is quite an 
art to which one must give a great deal of attention. We onl y see very partially, 
we never see anything completely, with the totality of our mind, or with the 
fullness of our heart. And unless we learn this extraordinary art, it seems to me 
that we shall be functioning, living, th rough a very small part of our mind, 
through a small segment of the brain. We never see anything completely, for 
various reasons, because we are so concer ned with our own pr oblems, or we are 
so conditioned, so heavily bur dened with belief, with tradition, with the past, that 
this actually prevents us from seeing or listening. We never see a tree, we see the 
tree through the image that we have of it, the concept of that tree; but the 
concept, the knowledge, the experience, is  entirely different from the actual tree. 
Here one is surrounded by a great many tree s, fortunately, and if you look around 
you, as the speaker is going on with the subject of seei ng, if you actually look at 
it, you will find how extraordinary difficult it is to see it all, so that no image, no 
screen, comes between the seeing and the actual fact. Please do this, don’t watch 
me—look at the tree, find out whether you can see it completely . By completely I 
mean with the totality of your mind and heart, not a fragment of it, because what 
we are going to go into this evening demands such observation, such seeing. 
Unless you actually do this (not theorize,  intellectualize or bring up various 
issues which are irrelevant) I am afraid  you will not be able to follow closely 
what we are going to  go over together. 
We never see, or actually hear, what another is saying; we are either 
emotional, sentimental or very intelle ctual—which obviously prevents us from 
actually seeing the colour, th e beauty of the light, the trees, the birds, and from 
listening to those crows; we never are in direct relationship with any of this. And 
I doubt very much if we are in relati onship with anything, even with our own 
ideas, thoughts, motives, impressions; there is always the image which is 
observing, even when we observe ourselves. 
So it is very important to understand th at the act of seeing is the only truth; 
there is nothing else. If I know how to see a tree, or a bird, or a lovely face, or the 
smile of a child—there it is, I don’t have to  do anything more. But that seeing of 
the bird, of the leaf, listen ing to the noise of birds, becomes almost impossible because of the image that one has built, not only about  nature but also about 
others. And these images actually preven t us from seeing and feeling; feeling 
being entirely different from sentimentality and emotion. 
And, as we said, we see everything fragmentarily and we are trained from 
childhood to look, to observe, to learn, to live in a fragm ent. And there is the vast 
expanse of the mind which we never touch or know; th at mind is vast, 
immeasurable, but we never touch it, we don’t know the quality of it because we 
have never looked at anything completely , with the totality of our mind, of our 
heart, of our nerves, of our eyes, of our  ears. To us the wo rd, the concept is 
extraordinarily important, not the acts of seeing and doing. But having the 
concept, which is a belief, an idea—havi ng this—conceptual living, prevents us 
from actually seeing, doing; and therefore we  say we have problems of action, of 
what to do or not to do, and the conflic t that arises between the act and the 
concept. 
Do please observe what I am talking ab out, not merely hear  the words of the 
speaker, but observe yourselves, using th e speaker as a mirror in which you can 
see yourself. What the speaker has to sa y is of very little importance, and the 
speaker himself is of no importance wh atsoever, but what you gather out of 
observing yourself is importa nt. It is so because there must be a total revolution, 
a complete mutation in our minds, in our way of living, in our feeling, in the 
activities of our daily life. And to bring about such fundamental, deep revolution 
is only possible when we kn ow how to look; because wh en you do look, you are 
not only looking with your eyes but you ar e also looking with your mind. I do not 
know if you have ever driven a car; if  you have, you are no t only visually aware 
of the approaching car, but your mind is fa r ahead watching the bend of the road, 
the side road, other cars coming and go ing. And this seeing is not only seeing 
through your eyes and nerves, but seeing with your heart, with your mind, and 
you cannot see completely in this way if you are living, functioning, thinking, 
acting within a fragment of the total mind. 
Look what is happening in the world—we are being conditioned by society, 
by the culture in which we live, and that culture is th e product of man—there is 
nothing holy, or divine, or eternal about culture. Culture, society, books, radios, 
all that we listen to and see, the ma ny influences of which we are either 
conscious or unconscious, all these encourage us to live within a very small 
fragment of the vast field of the mind. You go through school , college, and learn 
a technique to earn a living; for the next forty or fifty years you spend your life, 
your time, your energy, your thought, in that specialized little field. And there is 
the vast field of the mind. Unless we bring about a radical change in this 
fragmentation there can be no revolutio n at all; there will be modifications, 
economic, social and so-called cultura l but man will go on suffering, will go on 
in conflict, in war, in mise ry, in sorrow and in despair. 
I do not know if you read some time ago how one of the Marshals of the 
Russian army reporting to th e Polit Bureau, said that in the army they were 
training soldiers under hyp nosis—you know what that means? You are put under 
hypnosis and taught how to kill, how to obey completely, functi on with complete 
independence, but within a pattern, under the authority of a superior. Now culture and society are doing exactly the same thing to each one of us. Culture and 
society have hypnotized you. Do please listen to this ve ry carefully, it is not only 
being done in the army in Russia, but it is being done  all over the world. When 
you read the Gita endlessly, or the Koran, or repeat some mantram, some 
endlessly repeated words, you are doing exactly the same thing. When you say, 
“I am a Hindu”, “I am a Buddhist”, “I am a Muslim”, “I am a Catholic”, the same 
pattern is being repeated, you have  been mesmerized , hypnotized; and 
technology is doing exactly the same thing.  You can be a clever lawyer, a first-
class engineer, or an artist, or a great scientist, but always within a fragment of the whole. I do not know if  you see this, not because I describe it, but actually 
see what is taking place. The Communist s are doing it, the Capitalists are doing 
it, everybody, parents, schools, educatio n, they are all shaping the mind to 
function within a certain pattern, a ce rtain fragment. And we are always 
concerned with bringing about a change wi thin the pattern, w ithin the fragment. 
So, how is one to realize th is, not theoretically, not as  a mere idea, but see the 
actuality of it—you understand, see the ac tual? The actual being what is every 
day taking place and is spoken of in ne wspapers, by politicians, through culture 
and tradition, in the family, making you cal l yourselves Indians, or whatever you 
think you are. Then when you see, you must question yourself (I am sure you 
would if you saw it), and th at is why it is very impor tant to understand how you 
see. If you really saw it, then the que stion would be, “How can the total mind 
act?” (I do not mean the fragment, not the conditioned mind, nor the educated, sophisticated mind, the mind that is afraid, the mind that  says, “there is God” or 
“there is no God”, “there is my family, your family, my natio n, your nation”.) 
Then you will ask, “How can  this totality of the mi nd be, how can it function 
completely, even while learning a technique?” Though it has to learn a technique 
and to live in relationship with others, in  our present disordered society—bearing 
that in mind, one must ask this question,  which is a fundamental one: “How can 
this totality of the mind be made complete ly sensitive, so that even the fragment 
becomes sensitive?” I don’t know  if you have understood  my question, we shall 
come to it in another way. 
At present we are not sensitive; there are spots in this field that are sensitive, 
sensitive when our particular personality, our particular idiosyncracy, or our 
particular pleasures are denied—then there is a battle. We are sensitive in 
fragments, in spots, but we are not sens itive completely; so th e question is, “How 
can the fragment, which is part of the total, which is being made dull every day by repetition, how can that part also be made sensitive as well as the total?” Is 
this question fairly clear? Do tell me. 
Perhaps this is a new question to you, probably you have never asked yourself 
about it. Because we are all satisfied to live with as little trouble and conflict as 
possible, in that little part of that fi eld which is our life, appraising the 
marvellous culture of that little part as  opposed to other cultures, Western, 
ancient or any other. We are not even aware what the implications of this are—of living in a tiny fragment, a corner of a very  vast field. We don’t see for ourselves 
how deeply we are concerne d with the little part, and we are trying to find 
answers to the problem within that fragment, within that  little corner of this vast life. We ask ourselves, how can the mind (w hich is now half asleep in this vast 
field, because we are only concerned with the little part), how can we become 
totally aware of this whole thi ng, become comple tely sensitive? 
Now, first of all there is no method.  Because any method, system, repetition 
or habit, is essentially part of the corner of that field.  (Are we travelling together, 
taking a journey together, or are you fallin g behind?) The first th ing is to see the 
actual fact of the little corn er and what its demands are. Then we can put the 
question, “How can we make the whole field completely sensitive?”, because in 
that lies the only true revol ution. When there is total sensitivity of the whole of 
the mind, then we will act differently; ou r thinking, feeling, will be wholly of a 
different dimension. But there is no method. Don’t say, “How am I to arrive, achieve, become sensitive?”—you can’t go  to college to be come sensitive, you 
can’t read books or be told what to do to become sensiti ve. This is what you have 
been doing within  that corner of the field, an d it has made you more and more 
insensitive, which can be seen in your da ily life, with its callousness, brutality, 
and violence. (I do not know if  you have seen the pictur es in magazines of the 
American and Vietnamese so ldiers being wounded. Yo u may see it and say, “I 
am so sorry”, but it has not happened to you, not to you r family, not to your son.) 
So we become callous because we are functioning, living, acting, within the 
small petty little corner of a distorted field. 
There is no method. Please do realize th is, because when you realize it, you 
are free of the enormous weight of all au thority, and so free of the past. I don’t 
know if you see this. The pa st is implicit in our cultur e, which we think is so 
wonderful (the tradition, the beliefs, the memories, the obedience to it), and all 
that is put aside completely , forever, when you realize there is no method of any 
kind to bring freedom from the “little corn er”. But you have to learn all about the 
little corner. Then you are free of th e burden which makes you insensitive. 
Soldiers are trained to kill, practise day after day, day after day, ruthlessly, so 
that they have no human feeling left at all.  And that is the type of thing which is 
being done to each one of us every day, all the time,  by newspapers, by political 
leaders, by the gurus, by the Pope, by the bishops, everywhere, all over the 
world. 
Now, as there is no method, what is one to do? Method implies practice, 
dependence, your method, my method, hi s path and another’s path, my guru who 
knows a little better, this guru who is phon ey, that guru who is not (but all gurus 
are phoney, you can take that for grante d right from the beginning, whether they 
are Tibetan Lamas or Catholics, or Hindus)—all of them are phoney because they are still functioning in a very small pa rt of a field that has been spat on and 
trodden upon a nd destroyed. 
What is one to do? You understand my  question now? The problem is this: 
we don’t know the depth and the immensity  of the mind. You can read about it, 
you can read the modern ps ychologists, or the ancien t teachers who have talked 
about it—distrust them because it is you yourself who have to find out, not 
according to somebody else. We don’t know it—the mind—you don’t know it, 
so you cannot have any concept about it.  You understand what we are saying? You can’t have any ideas, any opinions, any knowledge about it. So you are free 
from any supposition, from any theology. 
So once again, what is one to do? All that one has to do is to see. See the 
corner, the little house that one has built in a corner of a vast, an immeasurable 
field; and living there, fi ghting, quarrelling, improving (you know all that is 
going on there), see it . And that is why it is very im portant to understand what it 
means to see, because the mo ment there is conflict you belong to that isolated 
corner. Where there is seeing there is no conflict. That is why one has to learn 
from the very beginning—no,  not the beginning, but now—to see. Not tomorrow, 
because there is no tomorrow—it is only sear ch for pleasure, or fear, or pain that 
invents “tomorrow”. Actually there is  no tomorrow psychologically, but the 
brain, the mind, has invented time; but we shall go into this later. 
So what one has to do is to see. You cannot see, if you are not sensitive, and 
you are not sensitive if you have an image between you and the thing seen. Do 
you understand? So seeing is  the act of love. You know what makes the total 
mind sensitive?—only love. You can learn a technique and yet love; but if you 
have technique and no love you are going to destroy th e world. Do watch it in 
yourselves, Sirs, do go into it in your own minds and hearts  and you will see it 
for yourselves. Seeing, observing, listeni ng, these are the greatest acts, because 
you cannot see if you are lo oking out from that little corner, you cannot see what 
is happening in the world, the despair, the anxiety, the aching loneliness, the tears 
of the mothers, wives, lovers, of thos e people who have been killed. But you 
have to see all this, not emotionally, nor sentimentally, not saying, “Well! I am 
against war” or, “I am for war”, as th at sentimentality and emotionalism are the 
most destructive things—they avoid facts and so avoid what is . So, the seeing is 
all important. The seeing is the unders tanding; you cannot understand through 
the mind, through the intellect, or u nderstand through a fragment. There is 
understanding only when the mind is co mpletely quiet, whic h means when there 
is no image. 
Seeing destroys all barriers. Look, Sirs, as long as there is separation between 
you and the tree, between you and me, a nd between you and your neighbour (that 
“neighbour” being a thousand miles away or next door), there must be conflict. Separation means conflict, that  is very simple. And we have lived in conflict, we 
are used to conflict and to separation.  You see India as a unit—geographical, 
political, economical, social, cultural, and the same goes for Europe, and 
America, and Russia: separate units, each against the other, and all this 
separation is bound to breed war. This doesn’t mean that we must all agree, or if 
we disagree that I am doi ng battle with you; there is no disagreement whatsoever, 
or agreement, when you see something as it is. It is onl y when you have opinions 
about what you see, that there is disagree ment and that there is separation. When 
you and I see that it is the moon, then there is no disagreement, it is the moon. But if you think  it is something, and I think it is  something else, then there must 
be division and hence c onflict. So in seeing a tree, when you actually see it, there 
is no division between you and the tree, there is no observer seeing the tree. 
We were talking one day to a very learned doctor, who had taken a drug 
called L.S.D., a minute dosage, and ther e were two doctors beside him with a tape recorder registering what he was saying. After a few seconds he saw the 
flowers on the table in front of him, a nd between those flowers and himself there 
was no space. It doesn’t mean he identif ied himself with those flowers, but there 
was no space, which means that there was no observer. We are not advocating 
that you should take L.S.D., because it has its own de leterious effects; and also 
when you take such things  you become a slave to th em. But there is a much 
simpler, more direct, more natural way, wh ich is to observe for yourself a tree, a 
flower, the face of a person; to look at any one of them, and so look that the 
space between you and them is non-exis tent. And you can only look that way 
when there is love—that word which has been so misused. 
We will not go into the question of lo ve for the time being, but when you 
have this sense of real observation, real seeing, then that seeing brings with it this 
extraordinary elimination of time and sp ace which comes about when there is 
love. And you cannot have love without recognizing beauty. You may talk about 
beauty, write, design, but if you have no love nothing is beautiful. Being without 
love means that you are not totally sens itive. And because you are not totally 
sensitive you are degenerating. This countr y is degenerating. Don’t say, “Aren’t 
other countries degenerating too?”—of cour se they are, but you are degenerating, 
though technically you may be an extraordinarily good  engineer, a marvellous 
lawyer, technician, know how to run computers; but you are degenerating 
because you are not sensitive to the whole process of living. 
Our fundamental problem then is—not how to stop wars, not which god is 
better than another god, not which political system or ec onomic system is better, 
not which party is worth voting for (the y are all crooked anyhow), but the most 
fundamental problem for the human being, whether he is in America, India, 
Russia, or anywhere else, is this ques tion of freedom from “the little corner”. 
And that little corner is ourselves, that little  corner is your shoddy little mind. We 
have made that little corner, because our own little minds are fragmented and 
therefore incapable of being sensitive to th e whole; we want that little part to be 
made safe, peaceful, quiet, satisfying, pl easurable, thereby avoiding all pain, 
because, fundamentally, we are seeking pleasure. And if you have examined 
pleasure, your own pleasure, have observed it, watched it,  gone into it, you will 
see that where there is pleasure, there is  pain. You cannot ha ve one without the 
other; and we are always demanding mo re pleasure and therefore inviting more 
pain. And on that we have built this part, which we call human life. Seeing is to 
be intimately in contact with it and you ca nnot be intimately, actually in contact 
with it if you have concepts, beliefs, dogmas, or opinions. 
So what is important is not to learn but to see and to  listen. Listen to the birds, 
listen to your wife’s voice, however irrita ting, beautiful or ugly, listen to it and 
listen to your own voice however beautiful , ugly, or impatient it may be. Then 
out of this listening you will find that a ll separation between the observer and the 
observed comes to an end. Therefore no  conflict exists and you observe so 
carefully that the very observation is discipline; you don’t have to impose 
discipline. And that is the beauty, Sirs (if you only realize it), that  is the beauty of 
seeing. If you can see, you ha ve nothing else to do, beca use in that seeing there is 
all discipline, all virtue, which is attenti on. And in that seeing there is all beauty, and with beauty there is l ove. Then when there is love  you have nothing more to 
do. Then where you are, you have heaven; then all seeking comes to an end. 
 
MADRAS  
3 JANUARY 1968 2 
 
 
FREEDOM  
 
 
To share a free mind. “If we could come upon this, it is really a 
mysterious flower.” Why has man not got this thing? Fear. “Living” 
is not living. Words taken for substance. Wastage of energy. “The mature mind has no comparison ... no measure.” The validity of “the 
life that you lead every day ... w ithout understanding it you will never 
understand love, beauty, or death”. Through negation, that thing which alone is the positive comes into being. 
 
 
It would be rather interesting and worthw hile if we could share together a mind 
that is not tortured, that is fundamentally  free, that has no barriers, that sees 
things as they are, that sees that an interval of time sepa rates man from nature 
and from other human beings, that sees the meaning of  dreadful, frightening time 
and space, that knows what is  really the quality of love. If we could share this—
not intellectually, not in a most cunning,  elaborate, philosophical, metaphysical 
way, but actually partake of  it, if we could do that I think all our problems would 
end. But this sharing is not  with another, one must have  it first. Th en when you 
have it you have it in abundan ce. And when there is th is abundance the one and 
the many are the same, like a tree  that is full of leaves of  which one leaf is perfect 
and is part of the whole tree. 
If we could, this evening, share th is quality, not with the speaker, but by 
having it and then sharing it. Then th e question of sharing it would no longer 
arise. It is like a flower full of scent wh ich doesn’t share, but is always there for 
any passer-by to delight in. And whether an yone is very near in the garden, or 
very far away, it is all the same to the flower, because it is full of that perfume, 
and so it is sharing with everything. If one could come upon this, it is really a 
mysterious flower. It only seems mysterious because we are so full of emotion 
and sentiment, and sentiment, in that emotional sense, has very little meaning; 
one can have sympathy, be generous, be very kind, gentle and extremely polite 
but the quality of which I have been speaking is entir ely different from all this. 
And don’t you wonder (not in abstract te rms, nor according to something to be 
gained by a system, by a philosophy or  by following some guru), don’t you 
wonder why it is that human beings lack this thing? They be get children, they 
enjoy sex, tenderness, a quality of sharin g something together in companionship, 
in friendship, in fellowship, but this th ing—why is it that we haven’t got it? For, 
when it is, then all problems whatever they may be, come  to an end. And haven’t 
you wondered lazily, on occasion, when you were walking by yourself in a filthy 
street, or sitting in a bus, or  when you were on a holiday  by the seaside, or in a 
wood with a lot of birds, trees, streams and wild animals, hasn’t it ever come upon you to ask—why is it that man, who has lived for millions of years, why is 
it that he hasn’t got this thing, this extraordinarily  unfading flower? 
If you have asked this question, even out of casual curios ity, you must have 
had an inkling, an intimation, a hint. Bu t, probably, you have  not asked it. We 
live such a monotonous,  dull, sloppy life within th e field of our own problems 
and anxieties that we have never even asked this questi on. And if we were to ask 
this question of ourselves (as we are going  to do now, sitting under this tree on a 
quiet evening, with the noise of the crow s), I wonder what would be our reply. 
What would each one of us honestly give as a direct answer, without 
equivocation or cunning, wh at would be the answer if  you put this question to 
yourself? Why do we go through all this  excruciating torture, with so many 
problems, with multitudinous fears piling up,  yet this one thin g seems to go by, 
seems to have no place at all. And if yo u were to ask why, why one has not found 
this quality, I wonder what would be your answer? Your answer would be 
according to your own intensity  in asking that question,  and its urgency. But we 
are neither intense nor urgent and we are not urgent or intense because we 
haven’t got the energy. To look at anyt hing, a bird, a crow sitting on a branch 
preening itself, to look at it with all your  being, with all your eyes, ears, nerves, 
mind and heart, to look at it complete ly, requires energy, but not the shoddy 
energy of a dissipated mind th at has struggled, that has to rtured itself, that is full 
of innumerable burdens. And most minds , ninety-nine point nine per cent 
recurring of minds have this terrible burden, this tortured existence. And so they 
have no energy, energy being passion. And you can’t find any truth without 
passion. That word “passion” is derived from the Latin word for suffering which 
again derives from Greek and so on; from this “suffering” the whole of 
Christendom worships sorrow, not passion. And they have given “passion” a 
special significance. I don’t know what sign ificance you give to it, the feeling of 
complete passion, with a fury  behind it, with total ener gy, that passion in which 
there is no hidden want. 
And if we were to ask, not just with  curiosity but with all the passion we 
have, then what would be the answer? Bu t probably you are afraid of passion, 
because for most people passion is lust, pa ssion that is derive d from sex and all 
that. Or it may come from th e passion that is felt thr ough identification with the 
country to which we belo ng, or passion for some mean little god, made by the 
hand or by the mind; and so  to us, passion is rather a frightening thing because if 
we have such a passion, we do not kno w where it will take us. And so we are 
very careful to canalize it, to build a hedge around it through philosophical 
concepts, ideals, so that energy, whic h is demanded in order to solve this 
extraordinary question (and it is quite ex traordinary if you put it to yourself 
honestly, directly), why we human beings , who live in families with children, 
surrounded by all the turmoil and violence of the world,  why, when there is one 
thing that could cover all this, why it is that we ha ven’t got it? I wonder, is it 
because we really don’t want to find ou t? Because to find out anything there 
must be freedom, to find out what I think,  what I feel, what are my motives, to 
find out, not merely to analyse intellect ually, but to find out, there must be 
freedom to look. To look at that tree yo u must be free from worry, from anxiety, from guilt. To look you must be free fro m knowledge; freedom is a quality of 
mind that cannot be got through renunciation nor sacrifice. Ar e you following all 
this, or am I talking to the winds and th e trees? Freedom is a quality of mind that 
is essential for seeing. It is not freedom from  something. If you are free from  
something that is not freedom, it is only a reaction. If you smoke and you give up 
smoking, and you say, “I am free”, you are really not free although you may be 
free from  that particular habit. Freedom concerns the whole habit-forming 
machinery, and to understand this whole problem of habit-forming one must be 
free to look at its mechanism. Perhaps we  are afraid of that freedom too; and 
therefore we put freedom far aw ay from us, in some heaven. 
So fear is perhaps the reason why we have not the energy of that passion to 
find out for ourselves why that quality of  love is lacking in us. We have 
everything else, greed, envy, superstition, fear, the ugliness of a shoddy little life, 
the routine of going to an office every day for the next forty, fifty years—not that 
one shouldn’t go to an office, one has to , unfortunately, but it becomes a routine, 
and that routine, that going to the office , doing the same thing day after day, day 
after day, for forty years, shapes the mind,  makes it dull, stupid, or clever in only 
one direction. 
It may be, probably it is, that each one of us is so frightened of life, because 
without understanding this whole pro cess of living, we can never possibly 
understand what it is not to live. You understand? What we call living, the daily 
boredom, the daily struggle, the daily c onflict within oneself and outside of 
oneself, the hidden demands, the hidden wants, the amb itions, the cruelties, and 
the enormous burden of conscious or unconscious sorrow—that is what we call living—don’t we? We may try to escape from it, go to the temple, or the club, 
follow a new guru, or become a hippy or take to drink, or join some society 
which promises us something—anything to escape. In fear lies the major 
problem of what we call living (fear of not being, fear of being attached, with all 
the great pain it brings—how to be detached—whether there is physical, 
emotional, psychol ogical, security—the fear of that—the fear of the unknown, 
fear of tomorrow, the fear of your wife leaving you, the fear of having no belief 
and being isolated, lonely, in despair at every moment, deep down), this is what 
we call living, a battle, a tortured exis tence with barren th oughts. We live like 
this because that is our life, with oc casional moments of sanity, occasional 
moments of clarity to which we cling furiously. 
Please, Sirs, don’t merely listen to word s and don’t be carri ed away by them; 
explanations, definitions, descriptions, are not the fact. The fact is your life, the 
fact is whether you are aware of it, a nd you cannot be aware of it through the 
speaker’s words, which mere ly describe your condition and if you are caught up 
in the description, in the wo rds, then you are certainly lost forever. And that is 
what we are—we are lost, we are forl orn because we have accepted words, 
words, words. So don’t please, I beg of  you, be caught in words, but watch 
yourself, watch your life, your daily life which you call living, which consists of 
going to the office, passing examinations, getting a job, not having a job, fear, 
family and social pressure, tradition, the to rture of not arriving, the uncertainty of 
life, the utter deep boredom of life th at has no meaning whatsoever. You may give significance to life, you can invent as philosophers and theoreticians do, as 
religious people do—invent the significance of life, that is  their job. But this is 
feeding on words wh en you need substance; you ar e fed with words, and you are 
satisfied with words. So to  understand this living we ha ve to look at it: to come 
intimately into contact with  it, not have the space and time interval between 
yourself and it. You don’t have this time-space interv al when you have deep 
physical pain, you act, you don’t theorize, you don’t quarrel about whether there 
is Atman or no Atman, soul  or no soul, you don’t begi n to quote the Gita, the 
Upanishads, the Koran, or the Bible or some  saint. Then you are face to face with 
actual life. Life is that movement which is active, the doing, the thinking, the 
feeling, the fears, the guilt, the despair—that is life. And one has to be intimately in contact with it. And one cannot be intens ely, passionately, vita lly, in contact, if 
there is fear. 
Fear is what makes us believe, whether our belief is in the ideological 
community of the Communist, or the theocr atical idea of a clergyman or a priest. 
All these things are born ou t of fear; obviously all gods, all, are the outcome of 
our agony; and when we worship them  we are worshipp ing our agony, our 
loneliness, despair, misery and sorrow. Do pl ease listen to all this—it is your life, 
not my life. You have to face this and so  you have to understand fear. And you 
cannot understand fear if yo u don’t understand life. You have to understand the 
jealousy that you have, the envy—envy and jealousy which are merely the 
indications of fear. And you can understand totally (not intellectually, there is no 
such thing as understanding intellectually, there is on ly understanding totally), 
you can understand totally an d it is like looking at that  sunset with your mind, 
with your heart, with your eyes, with yo ur nerves; it is then you understand. And 
to understand jealousy, envy, ambition, cr uelty, violence (to understand them and 
give your complete attention at the mome nt anything happens, at the moment you 
feel envious, angry, jealous or  full of hate, or feel dishonest in yourself), then, if 
you understand that, you will understand fear. But you can’t take fear as an 
abstraction. After all fear exists in rela tion to something. Are you not afraid of 
your neighbour, of the government, of yo ur wife, or your husband, afraid of 
death, and so on? You have to observe, not fear, but enquire as to what has 
brought this about. 
Now we are going to examine what living is, to which we cling so 
desperately, the living of  our daily, monotonous, trag ic life—the life of the 
bourgeois, the mediocre, the downtrodde n—because we are all downtrodden by 
society, by culture, by relig ions, by priests, by leaders,  by saints, and unless you 
understand this you will ne ver understand fear; so we are going to understand 
this living and also that e normous source of fear, which is called death. And to 
understand it you have to have tremendous energy, passion. You know how we 
waste our energy (I don’t mean through se x, that is a very small affair, don’t 
make that into somethin g unnecessarily tremendous ), but one must enquire 
directly, not according to Shankara or a ny of those people, who have invented 
their own particular form of escape from life. 
To find out what living is, we must not only have en ergy but also the quality 
of passion that is sustained, and intelle ct cannot possibly sust ain passion. And to have that passion one has to enquire into the wastage of energy . One can see that 
it is a waste of energy to follow anybo dy—you understand?—to have a leader, to 
have a guru, because when you follow you are imitating, you are copying, you 
are obeying, you are establishing authority and your energy is therefore diffused. 
Do observe this; please do so. Don’t go back  to your gurus, to  your societies, to 
your authorities, drop them like hot po tatoes. You can also see how you waste 
your energy when there is compromise. You know what  compromise is? There is 
compromise only when ther e is comparison. And we, from childhood, are trained 
to compare between what we are and what the head of th e class in our school is; 
compare ourselves with what we were ye sterday, noble or ignoble, with the 
happiness that we felt yesterday, that came upon us without warning, suddenly it 
came, the delight of looking at a tree, at fl owers, at the face of a lovely woman, a 
child or a man, and then we compare what is today with what was yesterday. 
This comparison, this measurement, is the beginning of compromise. Do please 
look at this for yourself. Find out the truth of it, that the moment you have a measure, which is compar ison, you are already comp romising with what is. 
When you say that man is an I.C.S., he earn s so much, he is th e head of this or 
that, you are comparing, judging, plac ing people as important, not as human 
beings, but according to thei r degrees, their qualities, th eir earning capacity, their 
job, their Ph.D.s and the whole lot of al phabets after their names; and so you are 
comparing, comparing yourself with anot her, whether “the other” is a saint, a 
hero, a god, an idea, or an ideology—comparing, measuring—and all this breeds compromise which is a tremendous wastag e of energy. This is not a question of 
when you are sexual and th e tradition behind that. So, one sees how this is a 
waste of energy and the energy is wasted when you indulg e in ideation, in 
theories: whether there is a soul or no soul, whether there is an Atman, or no 
Atman—isn’t it a waste of time, a waste of  energy? When you read or listen to 
some saint endlessly, or some sannyasi, making commentaries on  the Gita, or the 
Upanishads—just think of it!—the absu rdity of it!—the childishness of it! 
Somebody explains some bo ok which in itself is de ad, written by some dead 
poet, giving to it a tremendous significanc e. All this shows th at immaturity is 
essentially a waste of energy. 
The immature mind compares itself with what is and what should be, but it is 
only the immature mind that compares. Th e mature mind has no comparison, the 
mature mind has no measure. I don’t know if you have ever lo oked into yourself 
and watched how you compare yourself with another, sayi ng, “He is so beautiful, 
so intelligent, so clever, so  prominent; and I am nobody,  I would like to be like 
him.” Or, “She is so beautiful, has a good figure, has a nice mind, intelligent, 
bright, better.” We think and function in this comparative, measuring world. And 
if you have ever questi oned and observed maybe yo u have said, “No more 
comparison, no more comp arison with anybody, not with the most beautiful 
actress.” You know that beauty is not in the actress, beauty is something total, 
not in the face, in the figur e, in the smile, but where th ere is a quality of total 
comprehension, the totality of  one’s being; when that is what looks, there is 
beauty. Do watch it in yourself, please, try it, or rather do it—when you use the 
word “try”, you know how such a mind is the most deplorable, foolish mind; when it says, “I am doing my best, I am trying”, this indicates a mind that is 
essentially bourgeois, capable of measur ing, which is doing better every day; so, 
find out for yourself whether you can live,  not theoretically bu t actually, without 
comparison, measure, never using the words “better” or “more”. See what 
happens. It is only such a mature mind that is not wasting energy, only such a 
mind can live a very simple life, I mean a life of real simplicity, not the so-called 
simplicity of the man who has one meal, or one loincloth—that’s 
exhibitionism—but the mind that has no measure and is therefore not wasting 
energy. 
So to come to the point. We are wasting energy and you need this energy to 
understand this monstrous wa y of living. And we must understand it, that is the 
only thing we have, not gods, Bibles, Gita s, or ideals; what you have is this 
thing—the daily torture, th e daily anxiety. And to understand it, be in contact 
with it, is to have no sp ace between yourself as the observer and the thing as 
despair, and for this you must have trem endous, driving ener gy. To have that 
energy, it cannot be dissipa ted—when this occurs you will understand what 
living is. Then there is no fear of life, of  the movement of life. You know what a 
movement is? A movement has no end and no beginning, and therefore the 
movement in itself is the beauty, the glory. Are you following this? 
So life is this movement and to understand it there must be freedom, there 
must be energy. And to understand deat h is to understand something which is 
closely related to life. You know, beauty (not in pictur es, not in a person, not in 
the tree or in the cloud or in the sunset) beauty can not be divorced from love. 
And where there is love and beauty there is life and also there is death. You 
cannot separate one from the other. The mo ment you separate there is conflict, 
there is no relationship. So we have looked, not in grea t detail or widely, perhaps, 
but we have looked at life. 
Now let us consider, go in to, this question of death.  Have you asked why you 
are frightened of death? Apparently most people are. Some d on’t want even to 
know about it, or if they do, they want to glorify it. Or some  invent a theory, a 
belief, an escape—an escape su ch as resurrection, or reincarnation. The majority 
of the people who live in the East believe in reincarnation—you  all do, probably. 
That is, a permanent entity, or a collectiv e memory, is reborn again in the next 
life—isn’t it? That is what you all believe; to have a better opportunity, to live 
more fully, to perfect yourself, because this  life is so short, this life can’t give 
you all the experience, all th e joy, all the knowledge, therefore—let’s have a next 
life! You want a next life where you will have time and space to perfect yourself, so you have that belief. This is escape from the fact—we are not concerned with 
whether there is or there is not reincarnatio n, or whether there is continuity or no 
continuity. That requires quite a different  analysis. We can see briefly how that 
which has continuity is that which has been, that which has been yesterday will continue today, through today to tomorrow.  And such a continu ity is within time 
and space. This is not intellectual, you ca n observe it very simply for yourself. 
And we are frightened of this thing calle d death. We are not only frightened of 
living but we are also frighten ed of this unknown thing.  Are we frightened of the 
unknown, or frightened of the known, of losing the known? Th at is, the family, your experiences, your daily monotono us existence—the known—the house, the 
garden, the smile to which you are accustomed, the food which you have eaten 
for thirty years, the same food, the same climate, the same books, the same 
tradition—you are frightened of losing that, aren’t you? How can you be 
frightened of something you don’t know? 
So thought is frightened not only of losing the known but also thought is 
frightened of something whic h it calls death, unknown. As  we said, fear cannot 
be got rid of, but it can be understood only wh en the things that produce the fear, 
like death, are understood. Now man thro ughout time has pushed death far away; 
the ancient Egyptians for in stance lived to die. De ath is something in the 
distance, that time-space interval between  life and that which we call death. 
Thought, which has divided this, divide d the living from the dying, thought keeps 
it apart. Do go into it, Sirs, it is ve ry simple if you do so. Thought keeps it 
separate because thought has said, “I don’t know what the future is”; I can have a 
lot of theories if I believe in reincarnation, it means I must  behave, work, act, 
now—if I believe that. What you do no w matters when you die—but you don’t 
believe that way. You believe in reincarn ation as an idea, a comforting idea, but 
rather vague, so you don’t care what you  do now. You really don’t believe in 
karma although you talk a great deal a bout it. If you really , actually, vitally, 
believed in it, as you believe in earning money, in sexual experience, then every 
word, every gesture, every movement of  your being would matter, because you 
are going to pay for it in the next life.  So that belief would bring tremendous 
discipline—but you don’t believe, it is an  escape, you are frightened because you 
don’t want to let go. 
And what are you letting go? Look at it. Wh en you say, “I am afraid to let 
go”—what are you afraid of? Letting go what ? Do look at it very closely. Your 
family, your mother, your wife, your child? Were you ever in relation with them? 
Or were you related to an idea, to an im age? And when you say, “I am afraid to 
let go, to be detached”—what are you thinking of being detached from? Memories? Surely memories, memories of  sexual pleasure, memories of your 
becoming a big man, or a little man clim bing up the ladder, memories of your 
character, memories of your friendship—ju st memories. And you are afraid to let 
those memories go. However pleasant or  unpleasant they may be, what are 
memories? They have no substance whatso ever. So you are fri ghtened of letting 
go something which has no value at all, me mory being that wh ich has continuity, 
the bundle of memories, a unit, a centre. 
So when one understands living, that is, when on e understands jealousy, 
anxiety, guilt and despair and when one is  beyond and above them, then life and 
death are very close together. Then liv ing is dying. You know if you live 
according to memories, traditions, and what  you “should be”, you are not living. 
But if you put away all that, which me ans dying to all that you know—freedom 
from the known—this is deat h, and then you are living.  You are living, not in 
some fantastic world of concepts but actually living, not acco rding to the Vedas, 
the Upanishads which have no validity; what has validity is the life that you lead 
every day, that is the only life you have , and without understa nding it, you will 
never understand either love, beauty, or death. We come back to that orig inal thing, which is: why th ere is not this flame in 
our heart. Because if you ha ve examined very closely what has been said (not 
verbally, intellectually, but examined it in  your own mind, in your own heart), 
then you will know why you  haven’t got it. If you k now why you haven’t got it, 
if you feel it and live with it, if you ar e passionate in your search for why you 
haven’t got it, then you will find that yo u have it. Through complete negation, 
that thing which alone is the positive, wh ich is love, comes into being. Like 
humility, you cannot cultivate love. Humility  comes into being when there is 
total ending of conceit, vanity, but then  you will never know what it is to be 
humble. For a man who knows what it is to  have humility is a vain man. In the 
same way when you give your mind and your heart, your nerves, your eyes, your 
whole being to find out the way of life,  to see what actually  “is” and go beyond 
it, and deny completely, totally , the life that is lived now,  in that very denial of 
the ugly, brutal, in its complete denial, the other co mes into being. But you will 
never know  it either. A man who knows that he is  silent, or knows that he loves, 
doesn’t know what love is, nor what silence is. 
 
MADRAS  
10 JANUARY 1968 3 
 
 
THE SACRED  
 
 
Ploughing, never sowing. Ideation. Se nsitivity lacking in daily life. 
Attention and intelligence. Disorder in ourselves and the world: our 
responsibility. The question of seei ng. Images and direct contact. The 
sacred. “When you have that love you can put away all your sacred 
books.” 
 
 
One can go on endlessly reading, di scussing, piling up words upon words, 
without ever doing anything about it. It is  like a man that is always ploughing, 
never sowing, and therefore never reaping. Most of us are in that position. And 
words, ideas, theories, have  become much more import ant than actual living, 
which is acting, doing. I do not know if you have ever wondered why, throughout 
the world, ideas, formulas, concepts, ha ve tremendous significance, not only 
scientifically but also theo logically. I wonder why? Is it an escape from actuality, 
from daily, monotonous life? Or, is it that  we think ideas and theories will help 
us to live more—will give us greater vi sion, greater depth to life? Because we 
say that without ideas, without having a significance, an objective in life, life is very shallow, empty and has no meaning at  all. That may be one of the reasons. 
Or, is it because we find living, the daily grind, the routine,  the boredom, lacking 
in a quality of sensitivity that we hope to derive from ideation? 
Life as we live it is obviously very brutal, and makes us insensitive, dull, 
heavy, stupid, and so we may hope through ideas, through ideational mentation, to bring about a certain quality of sensitivity. Because we notice that our life inevitably is a repetitive affair (sex, o ffice, eating, the endless chatter about 
things that really don’t matter, the consta nt friction in relations hip), all this does 
make for crudeness, for brutality, for har dness. And being aware of that (perhaps 
not consciously but deep down), one may think that ideas, ideals, theories about 
God, the hereafter, may give a quality of  refinement, may perhaps bring to this 
dull, aching life, a meaning, a significance, a purpose; perhaps we think it may polish our minds, give them sharpness, give them a qua lity that the ordinary daily 
worker in the field or in the factory does not have. So perhaps that is one of the 
reasons why we indulge in this peculiar game. But even when we are sharpened 
and quickened intellectually by argument,  by discussion, by reading, this does 
not actually bring about th at quality of sensitivity. And you know all those 
people who are erudite, who read, who th eorize, who can discuss brilliantly, are 
extraordinarily dull people. 
So I think sensitivity, which destroys mediocrity, is very important to 
understand. Because most of us are b ecoming, I am afraid , more and more 
mediocre. We are not using that word in any derogative sense at all, but merely observing the fact of mediocrity in th e sense of being average, fairly well 
educated, earning a livelihood and perhaps capable of clever discussion; but this 
leaves us still bourgeois, mediocre, not on ly in our attitudes but in our activities. 
And maturity does not bring about a mutation, a change, a revolution in 
mediocrity (this can be observed very clearly), although one may have an old 
body, mediocrity in different forms continues. 
Perhaps we could go into this questio n of sensitivity (not mere physical 
refinement, which is obvi ously necessary), but into the question of sensitivity, 
the highest form of sensitivity which is  the highest intellig ence; without being 
sensitive you are not inte lligent. To listen to that crow, to be aware of it, to feel 
its movement, to have no space between that and yourself (which doesn’t mean 
identity with the crow , as this would be too absurd ), but that quality of a mind 
that is highly sharpened, attentive, in which the observer, which is the centre, the 
censor, with his accumulated memories and tradition, is not . It is after all a 
question of constant habit, the way we th ink, the food that we eat, the way we 
choose our friends, who obvi ously are our friends because  they don’t contradict, 
they don’t disturb us too much. So life becomes not only repetitive but also 
habitual, routine. So se nsitivity needs attention. 
You know concentration is a most deadly thing. You accept it, do you? I am 
saying, the speaker is saying something to tally contradictory to what you all feel 
is necessary. So don’t accept  it, nor deny it, but look at it. Feel your way into 
what is true and what is false. What the speaker is saying may be utterly stupid 
and nonsensical, or it may be true. But to  accept or to deny makes you remain as 
you are, dull, heavy, habit -ridden, insensitive. But in wh at we are going to say in 
a moment and even now, do  not accept or compare wi th what you already know 
or what you have been told or read, but  listen in order to find out for yourself 
what is true. And to give attentio n, to listen, you ha ve to give your total attention. 
You cannot give your total a ttention if you are merely le arning to concentrate, or 
if you are trying to concentrate on a few words, or on the meaning of words, or 
what you have already heard. But give your attention, and this means listening without any barrier, without any interfere nce or comparison, or condemnation; 
that is giving total attention; then you w ill find out for yourself what is true or 
false without being told . But this is one of the most difficult things to do—to give 
attention. Attention does not demand any quality of w ill or desire. We function 
within the pattern of desire, which is will. That is, we say, “I will pay attention, I 
will try to listen without the barriers, w ithout all the screens between the speaker 
and myself.” But the exercise of will is not attention. 
Will is the most destructive thing that man has cultivated. Do you again 
accept that? To accept, or to deny, is not to find the truth of it; but to find the 
truth of it you have to give attention to it, to what th e speaker is saying. Will is, 
after all, the culmination of desire—I want  something, I desire something, I want 
it and I pursue it. The desire may be a ve ry thin thread, but it is strengthened by 
constant repetition, and this becomes the will—“I will” and “I will not”. And on 
that assertive level (which can also be negative), we function, we operate and we 
approach life. “I will succeed, I will be come, I will be noble”—all very strong desires. And we are now saying that to be  attentive has nothin g whatsoever to do 
with desire or will. 
Then, how is one to be attentive? Please follow th is. Knowing one is not 
attentive (knowing one has a certain amou nt of concentration, which is an 
exercise of will which excludes and resi sts, knowing that any form of effort, 
which again is will, is not attention), how is one to attend? Because if you can 
give total attention to ev erything that you do (and you therefore do very little), 
what you do, you do completely with your heart, with your mind, with your 
nerves, with everything  you have. And how is this attention to come about, 
naturally, without any effort, with no exercise of the w ill, without using attention 
as a means to something else? I hope you  are following all this. You know, you 
are going to find it awfully difficult if you don’t follow this step by step, as you 
are probably not used to it; you are used to being told what to do, which you do 
repetitively, and you think you have underst ood it. But what we are trying to say 
is something entirely different. 
This attention then comes about natu rally, easily, when you know you are 
inattentive—right? When yo u are aware that you are inattentive, not giving 
attention, being aware of that fact is bein g attentive, and you ha ve nothing else to 
do. Do you understand? Th rough negation you come to the positive, but not 
through the pursuit of the positive. When you do things with out this action you 
do things in a state of inattention, a nd to be aware of action in a state of 
inattention, is attention. This make s the mind very subtle, makes the mind 
tremendously alert, because then there is no wastage of energy. Whereas the 
exercise of will is wastage of energy, just as concentration is. 
We said that this attention is nece ssary—don’t say, “Define what you mean 
by attention”, you might just as well look  it up in a dictionary. We are not going 
to define it, what we are trying to do is, by denying what is not, to come upon it 
by yourself. We are saying, this attenti on is necessary for sensitivity, which is 
intelligence at the deeper level. Again, these words are difficult because there is 
no measurement—when you say, “deeper ”, “more”, you are comparing, and 
comparison is a waste of energy. So, if that is understood, we can use words to 
convey a meaning which is not comparative but actual. 
This sensitivity implies intelligence and we  need great intellig ence to live, to 
live our daily life, because it is only in telligence that can possibly bring about a 
total revolution in our psyche , in the very core of our being. And such a mutation 
is necessary, because man has lived for m illions of years in agony, in despair, 
always battling with himself and with the world. He ha s invented a peace which 
is not peace at all; such peace is betw een two wars, between two conflicts. And 
as society is getting more and more complex, disorderly, comp etitive, there must 
be radical change, not in society, but in  the human being who has created society. 
The human being, as he is, is a very diso rderly person, he is very confused; he 
believes, he doesn’t believe, he has theories and so on and so on; he lives in a 
state of contradiction. And he has built a society, a culture which is 
contradictory, with its rich and its poor. Th ere is disorder, not only in our life, but 
also outwardly in society. And order is completely necessary. You know what is 
happening in the world—here in India—lo ok at it! What is happening? Colleges are closed, a whole generation of young people is without  education; they will be 
destroyed by politicians qua rrelling over some silly di vision of language. Then 
there is the Vietnamese war in which hu man beings are bein g destroyed for an 
idea. There are the racial riots in America, terribly destructive things. And in 
China there is civil war; in Russia, tyra nny, suppression of fre edom, at best slow 
liberalization—there is division betw een nationalities, separation due to 
religions, all of which indicate complete disorder. And this disorder is brought 
about by each one of us; we are responsible. Do please  see the responsibility of it. 
The older generation has made a mess of the world, you have made a terrible 
mess of the world with your pujas, your gurus, with your gods, with your 
nationalities, because you are only conc erned with earning a livelihood and 
cultivating part of the brain,  the rest you neglect, you discard. Each human being 
is responsible for this disorder within himself and in the society in which he 
lives; Communism and other forms of ty ranny are not going to bring order, on 
the contrary they are going to bring ab out more disorder, because man needs to 
be free. 
So there is disorder. And order is nece ssary, otherwise there can be no peace 
at all. And it is only in peace, in quiet ness, in beauty, that goodness can flower. 
Order is virtue, not the cultivated virtue of a cunning mind. Order is virtue, and 
order is a living thing, just as virtue is a living thing. So virtue cannot be practised as things are. We are going to  go into this, liste n to it. You cannot 
practise it any more than you can practise humility, or have a method to find out 
what love is. 
So order in this sense has the same pa ttern as mathematics; in the highest 
mathematics is the highest order, absolu te order. And that absolute order, one 
must have it in oneself. And as virtue cannot be cultivated, put together, so order 
cannot be engendered, put together by th e mind; but what the mind can do is to 
find out what disorder is. You are following this? You know what is disorder—
living in the way we live is total disorde r. As things are, each man is out for 
himself, there is no cooperation, there is no  love, there is complete callousness as 
to what happens in Vietnam or in China,  or at your next door neighbour’s. Be 
aware of this disorder, and out of the un derstanding of this disorder understand 
how it has come about, the cause of it, so  that when you unde rstand the causes, 
the forces that are at work bringing about  this disorder, understand it truly, not 
merely intellectually; then ou t of that understanding will  come order. Now let us 
try to understand disorder, which is our da ily life, understand it, not intellectually 
or verbally, but observe it, how one ha s been separated from others by being a 
Hindu, a Muslim, a Christian (the Christia n with his god, with his ideals and the 
Hindu with his ideals, the Muslim with his own ideals peculia r to him, and so 
on), observe it, come closely into cont act with it, do not have prejudices, 
otherwise you cannot come directly in to contact with another human being. 
So, out of disorder comes order, and it comes about naturally, freely, easily, 
with great beauty and vitality , when you are directly in contact with disorder in 
yourself. You are not in contact with this disorder directly, with yourself, if you 
do not know how to look at yourself. How to see yourself  (we have gone into this 
question of seeing), how to look at a tree , a flower—because as  we said the other day, the act of seeing is the act of love . The act of seeing is action. We will go 
into this a little bit because th is is really very important. 
When you give your atten tion completely, that is, w ith your mind, with your 
eyes, with your heart, with  your nerves—when you give  complete attention, you 
will find there is no centre at all, there is no observer and therefore there is no 
division between the observed and the observer, and you eradicate conflict 
totally, this conflict brought about by separation, by divi sion. It only seems 
difficult because you are not used  to this way of looking at life. It is really quite 
simple. It is really very simple if yo u know how to look at  a tree, if you know 
how to see anew the tree, your wife, your husband, your neighbour, if you look 
anew at the sky with its stars, with its silent depth—look, see and listen, then you 
have solved the whole problem of unde rstanding, because then there is no 
“understanding” at all, then there is only a state of mind that has no division, and 
therefore no conflict. 
To come upon this natu rally, easily, fully, there mu st be attention. This 
attention can only come about easily when you know how to look, how to 
listen—how to look at a tree, or your wife , or your neighbour, or  at the stars, or 
even at your boss, without any image. The image is, afte r all, the past—the past, 
which has been accumulated through experience, pleasa nt or unpleasant; and 
with that image you look at your wife, your children, your neighbour, the world; 
you look with that image at nature. So what is in  contact is your memory, the 
image which has been put together by  memory. And that image looks and 
therefore there is no direct contact. You know when you have pain there is no 
image, there is only pain, and therefor e there is immediate action. You may 
postpone going to the doctor, but action is  involved. In the same way when you 
look and listen, you know the beauty of immediate action in which there is no 
conflict whatsoever. That is why it is im portant to know the art of looking, which 
is very simple—to look with  complete attention, with your heart and with your 
mind. And attention means love, because you cannot look at that sky and be 
extraordinarily sensitive if there is a division between yourself and the beauty of 
that sunset. 
This order can only come about when we see, that is actually come into 
contact with disorder, which is in ourselves, which is us. We are not in 
disorder—“we” is a state of disorder. No w when you look at  yourself without 
any image about yourself, act ually at what you are (not  what Shankara, Buddha, 
Freud, Jung, or X Y Z says, because then  you are looking at yourself according 
to their image), you look at  the disorder in yourself, the anger, the brutality, the 
violence, the stupidity, the indifference,  the callousness, the constant drive of 
ambition with its peculiar cruelty—if y ou can be aware of that without any 
image, without any word, and look at it, th en you are directly in contact with it. 
And when there is direct contact there is immediate action. There is immediate 
action when you have intense pain, and when there is gr eat danger there is instant 
action. And this instant action is life, not  the thing that we have hitherto called 
life, which is a battlefield, an agony in that battlefield, despair, hidden wants and 
so on; that is what we have called life. Please do observe this in yourself. Use the 
speaker as a mirror in  which you see yourself now. Wh at the speaker is saying is merely exposing yourself to yourself. And therefore look at th is, listen to it and 
become completely in contact with it, be to tally with it, and, if you are, you will 
see that there is immediate action. 
The past is then destroye d. You know the past is the unconscious. You know 
what the unconscious is? Don’t go back to Freud, Jung or all the rest of those 
people, but look at it for yourself a nd find out, not thro ugh empiricism, but 
actually observe it. The past in you is your tradition, the books that you have 
read, the racial inheritance as the Hindu,  Buddhist, Muslim, Christian, and all the 
rest of it, and the culture in which you have lived, the temple s, the beliefs that 
have been handed down from generati on to generation. This constitutes the 
propaganda to which you have been subj ected, your propaganda; you are slaves 
to the propaganda of five  thousand years. And the Christian is a slave to 
propaganda of two thousand years. He be lieves in Jesus Christ  and you believe in 
Krishna, or whatever you do believe in, as the Communist believes in something 
else. We are the result of propaganda. Do  you realize what it means?—words, the 
influence of others; so there is nothing whatsoever original. And to find out the 
origin of anything we must have orde r. Order that can only  come about when 
there is the cessation of total disorder in oneself. Because all of us, at least those 
who are even a little serious and thoughtfu l and earnest, must have asked whether 
there is anything sacred at all, anything holy. Of cour se the answer is that the 
temple, the mosque, or the church is not  holy, is not sacred, nor the images 
therein. 
I do not know if you have experimented w ith yourself. Take a piece of stick, 
put it on the mantelpiece and every day pu t a flower in front of it—give it a 
flower—put in front of it a flower and repeat some words—“Coca-cola”, 
“Amen”, “Om”, it doesn’t matter what word—any word you like—listen, don’t 
laugh it off—do it and you will find out. If you do it, after a month you will see how holy it has become. You have identifie d yourself with that stick, with that 
piece of stone or with that piece of id ea and you have made it into something 
sacred, holy. But it is not. Y ou have given it a sense of holiness out of your fear, 
out of the constant habit of this trad ition, giving yourself over, surrendering 
yourself to something, which you consider  holy. The image in the temple is no 
more holy than a piece of ro ck by the roadside. So it is very important to find out 
what is really sacred, what  is really holy, if there is such a thing at all. 
You know, man has spoken of this throughout the centuries, seeking 
something that is imperishable, that is not created by the mind, that is holy in 
itself, something that is never touched by the past. Man is always seeking that. And man, seeking that, not finding it, ha s invented religion,  organized belief. A 
serious man has to find out, not through so me rock, temple or idea, but he has to 
find what is really, truly, everlastingl y sacred. If you cannot find it, you will 
always be cruel, you will always be in conflict. And if you will, this evening, 
listen, perhaps you may come upon it, not  through the speaker, not through his 
words, not through his statements, but  you may come upon it when there is 
discipline through the unders tanding of disorder. When you watch, see what is 
disorder; the very seeing of disorder demands attention. Please do follow this. 
You know, for most of us, discipline is a drill, as it is for the soldier, drill, drill from morning until night so that there is nothing but slavery to a habit. And that 
is what we call discipline; suppression, control—that is deadly, that is not 
discipline at all. Discipline is a livi ng thing, it has its own beauty, its own 
freedom. And this discipline comes natura lly, when you know how to look at a 
tree, how to look at the face of your wife, your husband, when you can see the 
beauty of a tree or a sunset. To  see, to look at that sky,  the glow of it, the beauty 
of the leaves against that glow, the ora nge colour, the depth of that colour, the 
swiftness of that colour— see it! To see it you must give your whole attention to 
it. And to give your whol e attention has its own disc ipline, you don’t want any 
other discipline. So that thing, that atte ntion is a living thing, moving and vital. 
This attention itself is virtue. You need  no other ethical standard, no morality 
(anyhow you have no mora lity, except on the one ha nd the morality that the 
society which you have built tells you, an d on the other hand what you want to 
do, and neither has anything whatsoever to do with virtue). Virtue is beauty and 
beauty is love, and without love you ha ve no virtue and therefore no order. So 
again, if you have done  it now, as the speaker is talk ing about it, looking at that 
sky with your whole being, that very act of looking has its own discipline and 
therefore its own virtue, its own order. Then the mind reaches the highest point of absolute order and therefore be cause it is absolutely orderly, it itself becomes 
the sacred. I do not know if you unders tand this. You know, when you love the 
tree, the bird, the light on the water, wh en you love your neighbour, your wife, 
your husband, without jealousy, that love  that has never been touched by hate, 
when there is that love, that love itself is sacred, you have no  other thing that can 
be more so. 
So there is that sacred th ing, not in the things that man has put together, but 
which comes into being when man cuts himself off entirely from the past, which 
is memory. This does not mean that man becomes absent-minded, he must have memory in a certain direction, but that me mory will be found to be part of this 
whole state in which there is no relation with the past. And that cessation of the 
past can only be when you see things as they are and come directly in contact 
with them—as with that marvellous suns et. Then out of this order, discipline, 
virtue, there comes into being love. Love is tremendously passionate and 
therefore it acts immediately. It has no time interval between the seeing and the 
doing. And when you have th at love you can put away all your sacred books, all 
your gods. And you have  to put away your sacred books, your gods, your 
everyday ambitions, to come upon that love. That is the only sacred thing there is. And to come upon it, goodness mu st flower. Goodness—you understand, 
Sirs?—goodness can only flower in free dom, not in tradition. The world needs 
change, you need tremendous revolutio n in yourself; the world needs this 
tremendous revolution (not economic, Co mmunist, bloody revolution that man 
has tried throughout history, that has only led him to more misery). But we do need fundamental, psychological, revolution, and this revolution is order. And 
order is peace; and this order, with its virtue and peace, can only come about 
when you come directly into  contact with disorder in your daily life. Then out of 
that blossoms goodness and then there wi ll be no seeking any more. For that 
which is, is sacred. MADRAS  
14 JANUARY 1968  
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDIA  
 
VI 
 
Four Dialogues in Madras 
 
 
1  Conflict 
2  The pursuit of pleasure 
3  Time, space and the centre 
4  A fundamental question 1 
 
 
CONFLICT  
 
 
Images: are we aware that we see through images? Concepts; the gap 
between concepts and daily living; resulting conflict. “To get 
illumination you must be able to look.” “To live without conflict, but 
not to go to sleep.” 
 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I think that these should not really be called “Discussions”, but 
rather conversations between two people  or between many of  us—conversations 
about serious matters in whic h most of us are not merely  interested but seriously 
concerned with deep intention to unders tand the problems involved. And so the 
conversations become not only objective bu t also very intimat e. It is like two 
people talking things over together am icably, easily—exposing themselves to 
each other. Otherwise I do no t see the point of such co nversations. What we are 
trying to do, aren’t we, is to understa nd (not intellectually or verbally or 
theoretically but actually) wh at are the imperative necessities in life, and in what 
way one can resolve the deep fundamental problems that every human being is 
concerned with. So is that very clear— that we are conversing together as two 
friends making themselves known to each  other, not merely dialectically giving 
their opinions, but actually investigating, thinking over their problems together? 
Now if that is clear, what shall we talk about together? 
 
Questioner: The other day you were talk ing about the observer and the observed, 
and resolving the conflict between... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is that what you want to discu ss? Please Sir, let us all find out 
what each one of us wants to discuss and then  put it all together and see what 
happens. 
 
Questioner: Why do you say that st udying Indian culture and art and Indian 
philosophies is violence? 
 
Questioner: What are the steps to take to uncondition ourselves? 
 
Questioner: The mind produces images, but what is seen by the mind is not true. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is that what we are all concer ned about in our daily life? Sirs, 
are we reducing, this morning, this ga thering to a mere in tellectual, verbal 
exchange of ideas? 
 
Questioner: What is meant by clear thinking? Questioner: What is the “actual”... 
 
Questioner: Do you suggest that viol ence and non-violence are two extremes? 
 
Questioner: Can we not guide our  lives by certain principles? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Haven’t we got enou gh questions? What do y ou think, Sirs, is 
the most important question of all these? 
 
Questioner: What is it to pay attention? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sirs, what do you think is the most important thing to discuss? 
Can we take this question of observati on and thinking? Sha ll we? That is—what 
is it to observe, to listen, and who is it th at listens, who is it that thinks? We shall 
relate it to daily living and not to some abstract con cepts, because this country—
like every other country in the world—func tions at the conceptual level, except 
technologically. What do we mean by seeing ? What do you think? 
 
Questioner: Observing a little more attentively. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Why do you say “a little  more”? Sir, when we use the words “I 
see a tree”, “I see you”, “I see or understand what you ar e saying”—what do we 
mean by the word “seeing”? Let us go slowly if you do not mind—step by step. 
When you see a tree, what  do you mean by that? 
 
Questioner: We only look superficially. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What do you mean by “superfici ally” looking at it? When you 
see a tree, what do you me an by “seeing”? Do please  stick to that one word. 
 
Questioner: Catching a glimpse of it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : First of all, Sirs, have you lo oked at a tree? If you have looked, 
what do you see through y our “seeing” eyes, the image of the tree or the tree? 
 
Questioner: The image of the tree. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do be careful, please, Sirs. Do you see the image in the sense of 
the mental construction or the concept of  that tree, or do you actually see the 
tree? 
 
Questioner: The physical existence of the tree. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do you actually see that? Sirs, th ere is a tree... You must be able 
to see a tree or a leaf out of that window  as I see it. When you  see it what do you actually see? Do you see only the image of  that tree or do you actually see the 
tree itself, with out the image? 
 
Questioner: We see the tree itself. 
 
Questioner: We come to understand it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Before we come to understand it, when I say “I see a tree” do I 
actually see the tree or the image I have ab out that tree? When you look at your 
wife or your husband, do yo u see her or him or the im age you have about him or 
her? ( Pause ) When you look at your wife yo u see her through your memories, 
through your experience of  her and her ways, and th rough those images you see 
her. And do we do the same  with regard to the tree? 
 
Questioner: When I look at a tree I just see a tree. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Ah, you are not a botanist, you are a lawyer and therefore you 
look at that tree actually as a tree, but if  you were a botanist, if you were really 
interested in the tree, how it grows, what it is like, the a liveness, the quality of it, 
then you would have images, you would have pict ures, you would compare it 
with other trees, and so on. You are looking  at it, aren’t you, with a comparative 
look, with botanical know ledge, seeing whether you like it or not, whether it 
gives shade or not, whether it is beautiful or not, and so on and so on. So, when 
you have all those images, associations, me mories with regard to that tree, are 
you then actually looking at that tree? Ar e you directly looking at that tree or 
have you a screen between that tree  and the visual perception of it? 
 
Questioner: I tell myself what kind of a tree it is. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : As a symbol. So you do not actually  look at that tree. But this is 
simple, isn’t it? 
 
Questioner: A tree is a tree. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The “tree”, Sirs, I see is rath er difficult. Let us look at it 
differently. Do you look at your wife or your husband th rough the image you 
have built about her or him?  Or your friend?  You have create d an impression, 
and the impression has left an image,  an idea, a memory , isn’t that so? 
 
Questioner: My impressions of  my wife have accumulated... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, they have solidified, thic kened, grown solid. So when you 
look at your wife or husband you are looking at him or her through the image 
you have built. Right. This is  simple, isn’t it? This is what we are all doing. Now, 
are we really looking at her or at the sy mbol, the memories?—is this the screen 
through which we look? Questioner: How c an we prevent that? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is not a question of preventing. Let us see first what is 
actually taking place. 
 
Questioner: When you look for the first  time at a woman or a man you have no 
previous impression. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Naturally not. 
 
Questioner: Are we not then lo oking at the woman or the man? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course you are. Why do you make it into such an 
abstraction? What actually takes place in daily life? You are married, or you live 
with a person, there is sex, pleasu re, pain, insults, annoyance, boredom, 
indifference, nagging, bullying, dominati on, obeying and all the rest of it—all 
that has created an image in you about the other person and through that image 
you look at each other. Right? So are we looking at the woman or at the man, or 
are the images looking at each other? 
 
Questioner: The image is the person. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, no. There is a vast differe nce between them. Is there not a 
difference? 
 
Questioner: We don’t know any other way. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is the only method of seeing you know. 
 
Questioner: We alter our impressions... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is all part of that image, Sir—adding and subtracting. Look, 
Sir. Have you an image of the speaker? You have  an image of the speaker and 
the image is based on his reputation, on wh at he has said previously, on what he 
condemns or what he approve s, and so on. You have bu ilt an image. And through 
that image you listen or lo ok. Right? That image either increases or decreases 
according to your pleasure or  pain. And that image is obviously interpreting what 
the speaker is saying. 
 
Questioner: We feel a strong impu lse to come to your talks... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, no, Sir. You may like my “blue eyes” or something! All 
that is included, Sir. The stimulation, th e inspiration, the dr ive—you can add lots 
of things to that image! 
 
Questioner: We don’t know of any other way of looking. KRISHNAMURTI : We are going to find out, Sir. We not only look at people or 
trees in that way, but al so we look at concepts, don’t we—at the Communist 
ideology, the Socialist ideology, and so on. We look at everything through 
concepts. Right? Concepts, beliefs, idea s, knowledge or experience, or what 
appeals to us. Communism appeals to one  person and does not appeal to the 
other; one person believes in  God and another does not be lieve in God. These are 
all concepts, Utopias, and on that level we live. Now, are they of any value? 
Being on an abstract level, conceptual , have they any value? Have they any 
significance in daily life? Life mean s living: living means relationship; 
relationship means contact; contact means cooperation. Have concepts of any 
kind any significance, in that sense, in relationship? But the only relationship we 
have  is conceptual. Right? 
 
Questioner: Then we have to  find a right relationship. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, it is not a question of right  relationship, Sir. We are just 
examining. Do please understand this, Sirs . Let us go into it slowly. Don’t let us 
jump. We live in concepts, our life is conceptual. We know  what we mean by 
“conceptual” so we do not have to an alyse that word. And so there is an actual  
daily living and a conceptual living. O r, is all living conceptual? Do I live 
according to my concepts? On e person believes, let us su ppose, that one must be 
non-violent. 
 
Questioner: I have not met anyone wh o actually believes in violence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : All right, Sir. My question is : Is all living conceptual? 
 
Questioner: The building of a concept is due to habit and becomes a habit. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Perhaps we shall be able to co me to that question later, if we 
can tackle this problem first. Our question is: Is all my living conceptual? 
 
Questioner: Is there no such  thing as spontaneous living? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : There is conceptual living an d spontaneous living, but do I 
know what spontaneous liv ing is when I am so conditioned, when I have 
inherited so many traditions?—is there any spontaneity left? Whether you have 
one concept or a dozen, it is still a questio n of concepts. Please Sirs, do hold to 
this for a minute. Is all life, all livi ng, all relationship merely conceptual? 
 
Questioner: How can that be? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Have you not an idea, Si r, that you should live this  way and not 
that way? Therefore when you say “I must do this and I must not do that”—it is 
conceptual. So, is all living conceptual  or is there a difference between non-
conceptual living and conceptual living— and hence a conflict between the two? Questioner: I would say that  we have a concept, but a fter experience the concept 
is modified. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes Sir, concepts are modified, obviously—modified, changed 
a little; but is conceptual living different from daily living or... 
 
Questioner: It is different. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait Sir, wait Sir! I want to analyse this a little more. Is 
conceptual living different fro m daily living, or is ther e a gap between the two? I 
say there is a gap. What is this gap? Why should there be a gap? 
 
Questioner: ( Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s it. My concept is diffe rent from the actuality that is 
taking place now. Right? So there is  an interval, a gap between what is, and what 
should be , or the concept. I am still sticking to the word “concept”. 
 
Questioner: When you talk about “the ac tuality”, that, to me, is the concept. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No Sir. When you have toothache it is not a concept. When I 
have toothache it is not a concept. It is an actuality. When I am hungry, it is not a 
concept. When I have sexual desire, it is  not a concept. But the next moment I 
say “No, I must not” or “I must”, “It is  evil”, or “It is good”. So there is a 
division between the actual, the what is, and the conceptual. So there is a duality. 
Right? 
 
Questioner: If I am hungry it is not just a concept. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is what we are saying, Sir. The primary urges, hunger, sex 
and so on, are actual, but we also have concepts about them. Concepts of class 
division, and so on. So, we are trying to fi nd out why this gap exists and if it is 
possible to live without this gap, to live only with what is. Right? That is what 
we are trying to find out. 
 
Questioner: Animals just ea t when they are hungry. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But you and I are not animals.  We may be at moments, but 
actually, now, we are not animal s. So do not let us go ba ck to animals, babies and 
previous generations ; let us stick to ourselves . So there is the actual moment of 
living and the ideational,  conceptual, non-factual living. Right Sirs? I believe  in 
something, but that belie f has nothing to do with the actuality, though the 
actuality may have produced th e belief; the actual is not related to that belief. “I 
believe in universal brothe rhood.” God knows who can believe it, but I say, “I 
believe in universal brotherhood”—but actually  I am competing with you. So the 
actuality of competition with you is en tirely different from the conceptual. Questioner: ( Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We have made it fairly clear  up to now. The actual is, “ what 
is”—the factual. There is hunger in this country, poverty, overpopulation, 
corruption, inefficiency, brutality, and all the rest of it. That is the fact, but the 
ideation is that we should not be that. Right? In our daily life the “actual”, the 
“what is”, the “factual” is something entirel y different from the real fact; it is the 
conceptual. Right? 
 
Questioner: But what you call the actual is just another concept, surely. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. I am hungry—that is not a concept, I am hungry. It is not 
born out of a memory of yesterday’s hunger. If it is born out of yesterday’s 
hunger it is not actual. Take sex—you do  not mind my talkin g about sex, do you? 
We all... but never mind. ( Laughter ) The sexual urge may or may not be there, 
but it is stimulated into being by the image which is fictional, not actual. So I am 
asking why do we have the conceptual at all? 
 
Questioner: Perhaps it is... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, no, Sir. Don’t just answer  me but find out if you have a 
concept at all. Why do I have a concept at all? 
 
Questioner: There are some things  like anger which are psychological... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : All that is related, Sir. When  I am angry, when there is 
irritation—it is a fact. It is there. But the moment I say, “It must not be there” it 
becomes conceptual. If you say “Well, th e Indian starvation can only be solved 
by a particular political party,” then it is conceptual—then you are not dealing 
with the fact. The Communi st, the Socialist, the Congressman—whatever the 
parties are, they all think they will so lve the problem of starvation if you follow 
their method—which is sheer nonsens e, of course. Starvation is the fact and the 
conceptual is the idea, th e method, the system. So I am asking myself, why do I 
have concepts at all? (Don’t answer me , Sirs. Ask yourself that question.) Why 
do you believe in the Master s, the Gurus, in God, in  the perfect state? Why? 
 
Questioner: I wonder if... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Listen to what the first gentlema n says. He says that by having a 
concept I reform myself. Everybody thinks that, no t only you. By having an 
ideal, a goal, a principle, a hero, and so  on, you think you will be helped to 
improve yourself. Now, what does this do actually, does it improve you or does it 
create conflict, conflict between what is and what should be? 
 
Questioner: We are afraid, and theref ore we retreat into these concepts. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : All right. Now, can we live without concepts? Please let us go 
on, step by step. Can you live withou t a belief—follow this slowly—without a 
concept, without hope or despair? 
 
Questioner: Surely we must have some beliefs... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Go into it, find out. Find out why you have concepts, first. Is it 
because you are afraid? 
 
Questioner: One has to battle with others for the primary needs of life. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You say one has to battle. 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You haven’t answered the other gentleman’s question. You 
have no respect for each other in this que stioning! Let us find out what the other 
chap wants. You know there are two th eories about this, one concerns “the 
survival of the fittest”, wh ich implies everlasting battle , wars, the superior race, 
the perfect concept, and so on. Then there is the other, that through violence there 
can be no change at all—in  the most fundamental sens e of that word. I do not 
know why you have any belief about this, one way or the ot her. The actual fact is 
that to survive at all in the world you have to battle, either very cunningly, 
cleverly, brutally or very subtly exploiting people in a nice gentle way. That is 
the fact. And why do we have a conc ept about it or about anything else? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : (Wait, wait Sir. Go slowly. You are much too quick. Go 
slowly.) First there is, as one  observes in one’s daily life, the non-conceptual and 
the conceptual, and I ask myself—and I hope you are asking  yourself too—why 
do I have concepts at a ll—belief that Communism or  Capitalism is the most 
wonderful way of life? Why? Or  the concept that there is God or there is no God. 
Why do we have concepts at all, in cluding concepts of Rama and Sita? 
 
Questioner: Without concepts we would be in a state of vacuum. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Have you found that out? Is th at a fact? Is that so? You are 
really not being very serious in going in to this question. You have to be very 
precise and very clear, and not just ju mp from one concept to another. You are 
not answering the question. Why do you have , if you do have, a ny concept at all? 
You want to escape fr om the actual, from the “what is ”, don’t you? (That is what 
that gentleman says, Sir... Let us understand that question first. “To escape from 
what is.”) Why do you want  to escape from what is? You would not want to 
escape from what is if it were pleasurable. You only want to escape from what is when it is painful. Questioner: We do not exactly  know “what is”, and we  are trying to understand. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Don’t you know what is? And what do you mean by trying ? 
Don’t you have stomachache? Do n’t you get angry? Aren’t  you frightened, aren’t 
you miserable, aren’t you confused? Thos e are actual facts, Sir, there is nothing 
that requires you “to try” about them. Do consider all this, Sirs. If it were only a 
case of pleasure we would not have concep ts at all. We would just say “Give me 
everything that will give me pleasure and don’t bother about anything else.” But 
if it is painful we wa nt to escape from what is, into a concept. This is our daily 
life, Sirs. There is nothing to argue about. So your Gods, your beliefs, your 
ideals, principles are an escape from the da ily misery, daily fears, daily anxieties. 
So, to understand something, cannot we ask: “Are concepts necessary?” You 
understand, Sir? I am afra id, and I see the absurdity of escaping from that into 
something which is a concept, a belief in the Masters, in God, in the Hereafter, 
into leading a perfect life—you know, all that stuff. Why can’t I look at that fear? 
Why do I have to have concepts at all? And do not concepts prevent me from 
looking at that fear? Right Sirs? So concep ts are a barrier; they act as a barrier 
which prevents you from looking. 
 
Questioner: Please clarify what you have said. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Clarify what? 
 
Questioner: Please make a clearer analysis. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : A clearer analysis? Perhaps you would do it yourself, Sir. 
 
Questioner: You do it better than I. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What does it matter, who does it better or worse? What is 
important is whether we understand this thi ng clearly. It is fair ly simple, Sirs. My 
life is very dull. I live in  a shoddy little house with an ugly little wife and I am 
miserable, anxious, and I want  satisfaction, I want happiness, I want a glimpse, a 
moment of inexpressible bliss, and so I escape to something which I can call X. 
That is the whole principle, isn’t it? Th at does not need further explanation, does 
it? And I live there , in an ideological world, a world which I have conceived, or 
inherited, or been told abou t. And thinking and living in  that abstraction gives me 
a great delight. It is an escape from the ac tual daily boredom of life. Right? Then 
I say to myself, “Why do I have to escape?”  Why can’t I live and understand this 
terrible boredom? Why do I waste my energies in escaping?... 
You are all silent about this! 
 
Questioner: You are conceiving a differe nt form of existence from anything we 
know. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : I am not conceiving anything . I say, look. And I am looking at 
this fact that I have escaped, that I am escap ing, and I see how absurd it is. I have 
to deal with what is , and to deal with what is I need energy. Therefore I will not 
escape. Escape is a waste of energy. So , I will have nothing whatsoever to do 
with beliefs, Gods, concepts. I will have no concept at a ll. (Of course not, Sir, of 
course not.) If you burn your finger, and the pain creates a concept that you must 
never put your finger in the fire, then that concept has value, doesn’t it? You 
have also had wars, thousa nds of wars. Why haven’t you  learnt from that not to 
have any more wars? (Come off it, Sir. You know very well what I mean.) We 
don’t have to analyse all this every step as we go along. I burn my finger, and I 
say to myself I must be careful here after. Or, you tread on my toe, both 
metaphorically and physically , and I get angry physica lly, and I boil inwardly. I 
have learnt something from that, and I say, “I must not”, or “I must”. (It is the 
same thing. Avoid, build a resistance. I understand those things very clearly. 
They are necessary.) 
 
Questioner: When someone makes me angr y I remember it and when I meet him 
next time I am ready for him. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s it, Sir! That’s just it! Can I meet him without the concept 
next time? He might have changed, but if I meet him with my concept, that he 
has trodden on my toe, I have no relationship with him. Therefore, is it possible, 
though you have had some sort of expe rience, is it possible to be without the 
concept? So we must come back to th e question—“Is it possibl e to live in this 
world without any concept?” 
 
Questioner: I don’t think so. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do not let us say it is possible or it is not possible. Let us find 
out. You have separated yourselves fro m others, Sirs, as Hindus. This is a 
concept. (Yes, you are! My God, you are .) Would you marry your daughter to a 
Muslim? Let us be clear. I am taking an instance, Sir. You hurt me, and that hurt remains in my memory. I try to avoid you if I can. But unfortunately as you live 
in the same house or the same street I ha ve to meet you every day. And I have an 
image, the crystallized image, thickene d memory, which is meeting you every 
day. Hence there is a battle going on betwee n us two. And so I say to myself, is it 
possible to live without that image, so that I really meet you? You might have changed or you might not have changed, but I will not have the image. Can I not 
find out how to live without th e image, so that my mind is not cluttered up with 
images? Do you follow, Sirs? So that my mind is free, free to look, to enjoy, to 
live. 
 
Questioner: That’s an idea. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh no! To you it is an idea, but not to  me. I say, “He has hurt 
me, but why should I carry on that burden?” Questioner: I just take care next time. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, but I won’t keep on repea ting, “I must be careful”, which 
only thickens the memory. I say that is no way to live, but I only say so for me, 
not for you. I don’t want that image and to be carrying it with  me all the time. 
That is not freedom. You may have changed, and also I like to be without  an 
image. Not as an idea, but it is  an actual fact that I do no t want it. It is absurd for 
me to have an image about anybody. So let us come back to the other things. 
 
Questioner: If I meet a good man, is it not a good thing to have a memory, an 
impression that he is a good man? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : A bad impression or a good impression is still an impression. 
There is no “good imag e” and “bad image”. (Inaudible remark ) (For bad eyesight 
you must go to a better oculist.) This  division between the conceptual and the 
actual breeds conflict. And a man who want s to investigate and go beyond the 
actual must have all his energy. That en ergy cannot be wasted through conflict. 
So I say to myself—and I am not telling you what to do—I say to myself, “It is 
absurd to live with concepts at all.” I w ill deal with facts, with what is, all the 
time, and will never be immersed in the concept. So then I am faced with the 
question, “How do I look at the fact, at what is?” I am not concerned with the 
conceptual at all. I am only concer ned in the observation of actually what is . 
Right? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : (Yes, but you take things as they come with a series of habits. 
Habits of which you may be consciou s or unconscious... Sirs , we keep going 
away from the main issue.) So the question is, “Can I live with what is, without creating conflict?” Do you follow? I am angr y. That is a fact. I am jealous. I like 
and dislike. That is a fact. Can I live w ith that, with what is, without making a 
problem, a conflict out of it? 
 
Questioner: It is not a very happy thought for me! I am at a loss...  (inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The gentleman says he is at a loss because he is at a certain 
level and his wife, children and neighbour are at another level—higher or inferior. And so, he says, there is no coop eration. I carry on and they carry on. 
That is what we are all doing, Sir. So then, what?... You see, we will not come to 
the central issue, which is, “Can I live, without conflict,  with what is?” And not 
go to sleep, because conflict, apparently does keep one half-awake. I am asking, 
“Is it possible to live with what is, wit hout conflict, and to go beyond it?” I am 
jealous. That is a fact. I see that in my lif e. I am jealous of my  wife, jealous of the 
man who has more, more of worldly g oods and of intellect—I am envious. I 
know how envy comes. It comes throu gh comparison—but I do not have to 
analyse how envy arises. Now can I live with  that, understand it, not have concepts about it? So that after looking at  it, so that by unde rstanding it, studying 
its structure and nature I have really u nderstood it and so can  go beyond it, so 
that envy never touches the mind again? You see, you are not interested in it. 
You really are not interested in it, are you? 
 
Questioner: Yes we are. If we were not interested we would not be here, but we 
are not in contact with you. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Why? Why are you not in contac t with the speaker and what he 
is saying? He has questioned very clearly , whether it is possible to live without 
concepts? And he took the example of envy. We know the nature and the 
structure of envy. Now can you live with it, and go beyond it,  without conflict? 
So why are you not in contact  with what the speaker is  saying? If you are not in 
contact (not you, not you person ally Sir), it may be because you like envy. 
(Inaudible ) Look, Sirs—what happens? I am envious. That envy arises through 
measurement. I have little and you have more, or I am dull and you are very 
clever. I have a low position and you have  a high position, you have a car and I 
have no car. So, through comparison, th rough measurement this envy arises. 
Right? Is not that clear? So, can I live without measur ement? This is not a 
concept. 
 
Questioner: It is a questi on of reconciling ourselves to  the fact that there is 
inequality. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You are not reconciling, Sir. I am asking you a question and you 
are talking about a reconciliation betw een black and white. Then you only 
produce grey. ( Laughter ) I am asking quite a different question. Do please listen, 
Sir. Can you live your daily lif e at the office, at home, without any measurement, 
without any comparison? No? Why do you  have comparison?  Because you have 
been conditioned from childhood  to compare. Follow this, Sirs. It has become a 
habit, and you keep on rep eating that habit. And though that habit creates misery, 
confusion and all the rest of it, you don’t care. You carry on w ith the habit. Now, 
what will make you aware of the nature of  this habit of co mparison? Somebody 
forcing you to be aware of th e habit? If the Government were to say, “You must 
not be envious”, you would then find other ways of be ing envious, more subtle 
ones. Religions have trie d this, but you have overcome all religions. So by 
forcing you to be non-e nvious you will revolt agains t it, and the revolt is 
violence. You understand, Sirs ? If I force you into a co rner and say, “You must 
do this”, then you will kick me. But if you become aware of the habit you have 
cultivated for forty, twenty or ten years of comparing yo urself with another, then 
what takes place? You see, you are not interest ed in this. I have lost you. Because 
you are not interested in breaking do wn your habits. The Communist has his 
habits, and the non-Communist has his ha bits, and those two are going to battle 
with each other. That is what is going on in the world. You have your habit in 
believing in something, and I have no habit in belief. So, what is our relationship? None at all! So we come back to a very simple thing, and God knows why you sit here 
and listen. Is this becoming a habit? 
 
Questioner: We hope so. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You hope it will become a habit! 
 
Questioner: We hope to get illumination. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You won’t. Sir, to get illumina tion you must have a clear mind, 
you must be able to look. 
 
Questioner: You said...  (inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No Sir, I did not say that. I did not say that. I will not go back 
through all that again—it is useless. Yo u see you will not face  the actuality, the 
“what is”! You want to live in concepts, and I do not want to live in concepts. 
For Heaven’s sake: love is not a concept.  And because you have  no love, you live 
in concepts. (And you all shake your heads and agree and go on with your 
habits.) So why do you liste n, why do you come here, because when we talk 
about these real things you are off—away at some tangent! Unfortunately, or 
fortunately, the speaker has talked for forty-two years.  And when it comes to the 
point—which is to live withou t envy—you are not there! 
 
Questioner: The truth is we do n’t want to be disturbed. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Then don’t be disturbed. Go away! Why do you  come? You are 
not going to get any “poonyum” out of this, poonyum being merit. Here is a 
fundamental issue, and please do listen. It  is a fundamental issue—to live without 
conflict, but not go to sleep. To live w ithout the concept re quires extraordinary 
intelligence and a great deal of energy. And I say that when you live in concepts 
you are wasting energy. And you say, “Oh,  that’s a very nice idea”, and you still 
live there in concepts. You say, “I am a Communist, I believe in God, I don’t 
believe in God and so on.” And so I say to myself, “What is wrong?” 
 
Questioner: There is an urge to know more. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Then pick up an en cyclopedia or a dictionary and you will know 
more. To know more truly, means to k now more about ones elf. Otherwise there 
is only ignorance. You may be technologi cally brilliant, but if you do not know 
about yourself  you are an ignorant person. Here I am, and I say, “I must  know 
why I live in concepts. I want  to analyse it, to understa nd it.” Not that I must or 
must not live in concepts, but I want to know why . And when I look I know why. 
Because my life is so shoddy, mediocre, petty, and to escape from that I go off into concepts—and I have lo vely concepts, immense conc epts, concepts invented 
by Lenin, or Trotsky or Nehru or Gandhi, it does not  matter who. I escape into those but I am still angry, I am still envi ous, I am still bored . So, why should I 
live in concepts at all? So I say, “I won’t, becau se it is stupid.” I will not do it! 
But you don’t say that. 
 
Questioner: Do we understan d the meaning of the word? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I’m afraid we do not understand about anything . So we will 
have to restart. Too bad! 
 
Questioner: It is somethin g which needs going into and we must think about it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Really! If I hit you, you will know  about that! If you are 
insulted, or have pain, yo u do not say you will think ab out it. This is all so 
obvious, but you quote a pla titude and think you have un derstood it. So we lose 
contact with each other when we are not talking about concep ts. When we talk 
about concepts, we are in contact. When we talked about God (if I was foolish 
enough to talk about God), then we were both in contact. But when you come 
down to an actual fact—of greed, envy—then we lo se contact. Do you know, 
Sirs, what is happening in the world? The world being India also. How India is 
degenerating, don’t you know it? Not only here, but in the world. And probably 
you cannot do anything about it. At least, there can be a few who will keep the 
light burning. That is all. But that is up to you, Sirs. 
 
MADRAS  
2 JANUARY 1968 2 
 
 
THE PURSUIT OF PLEASURE  
 
 
Self-interest and self-dedication. Demand for satisfaction. Levels of 
gratification. Has psychologica l gratification any meaning? “A 
whirlpool of mischief and misery inwardly.” Aggression. Pursuit of 
pleasure. “There are no roots of heaven in pleasure—there are only 
roots of indifference and pain.” Watching is its own discipline. 
 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What shall we talk over together this morning? ( Pause ). 
 
Questioner: May we pursue wh at we talked about last  time we met here, with 
regard to concepts? Can we liv e without concepts, beliefs? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do you not think that before we  can go into that or any other 
question it is important to question, to question critical ly, not only someone else, 
but, what is much more im portant, to be critically self-aware? It seems to me 
much more important to question one’s own motives, one’s attitudes, beliefs, 
ways of life, habits, trad itions, the way one thinks an d why one thinks in that 
way. Because I do not see how we can ha ve sanity if we are not aware of our 
own reasoning or non-reas oning, if we are not aware of our own emotional 
attitudes and our narrow or wide beliefs. I do not see how we can bring about any 
kind of sanity in our lives (sanity being a way of living which is fairly healthy) 
unless we are critically aware of what we are talking about, and therefore 
questioning everything, not accepting a thing  about ourselves or others. I think if 
we could start from that—which does not me an that we must be sceptical about 
everything as this would be another form of insanity. But if we  can question, then 
I think what we shall discover, talking it over together this morning, will have 
some value. 
 
Questioner: Can we continue wi th what you have just said? 
 
Questioner: Will you take up th e subject of space and time? 
 
Questioner: Will you explain about the doctor who took  L.S.D. and destroyed a 
space within himself, in terms of  the observer and the observed? 
 
Questioner: Could we discu ss envy, and its activities? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, if I may ask you a qu estion—What is your deep, 
fundamental, lasting interest in life? Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is that  your deep fundamental interest , Sir? Rather feeble isn’t 
it? If you skipped all these double, indire ct, oblique questions  which are beside 
the point and if you dealt with one qu estion directly and honestly, would you 
know what is your fundamental, lasting, total interest? 
 
Questioner: To be free. 
 
Questioner: We want to be happy. 
 
Questioner: I am really interested in myself... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : ...as most of us are, interested in my progress, interested in my 
job, interested in my little family, getti ng a better position, mo re prestige, more 
power, dominating others, and so on and so on. I think it would be logical, would 
it not, to admit to yourselves that that is  what most of us are interested in—me 
first, and everyone else second. 
 
Questioner: And that is very wrong. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I do not think it is wrong. What is ther e wrong about it? You 
see, Sir, that is what we are doing all the time. Now let us take that fact. Most of 
us are interested in the little corner in  which we live, not only outwardly but 
inwardly. We are interested in it, but we never decently, honestly, admit that to 
ourselves. If we do, we are rather asha med of it and so we add such comments 
as: “I do not think it is right”, “It is wrong”, “It does not help mankind”, and all 
that blaa. So there it is. One is interested in oneself  fundamentally and one thinks 
it is wrong (for various re asons, ideologically, trad itionally, and so on). The 
actual daily fact is that one is inte rested in oneself, and you think it is wrong . But 
what you think  is irrelevant, it has no validity at  all. Why introduce that factor? 
Why say “It is wrong”? That is an idea, is it not?—it is a concept. What is is the 
fact, which is that one is interested in oneself. 
 
Questioner: I don’t know if it’s all right to ask a question. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Quite right. Go ahead, Sir. 
 
Questioner: When I do something for others I feel more satisfied. I see that to be 
so self-concerned is not satisfactory, but to work in a school or to help another is 
more satisfactory than to th ink about oneself, which is not quite so satisfying. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What is the difference? You wa nt satisfaction—which is self-
concern. Follow this out, Sir, for yourself. If you are seeking satisfaction in helping others and theref ore that gives greater sa tisfaction, you are still 
concerned about yourself, about what will  give you greater satisfaction. Why bring any ideological concept into it? One wants freedom because it is much 
more satisfying and to live a petty little li fe is not so satisfa ctory. So why have 
this double thinking? Why say one is satisfactory and the other is not. You 
understand, Sir? Why not say—I really want satisfaction , whether it is in sex, in 
freedom, or helping others, in becoming a great saint, or politician, or engineer, 
or lawyer. It is all the same process, is it not? Satisfaction in many ways, both 
subtle and obvious, that is  what we want. Right? When  we say we want freedom 
we want it because we think perhaps it may be terribly satisfying; and the 
ultimate satisfaction, of course, is th is peculiar idea of self-realization. 
 
Questioner: So we must get rid of  this search for satisfaction. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Ah, no Sir. Wait Sir. To get rid of satisfaction is not freedom. 
Freedom is something entirely diffe rent; not something to be had from  
something. If I get rid of or free myself  from satisfaction, I am freeing myself 
from it because I seek a much  greater satisfaction. No ? So why not find out why 
we want satisfaction? Not th at “we should not”, that is  only a concept, a formula, 
and hence there is contradic tion, and therefore conflict. So let us take this one 
thing. Most of us want, desire, sear ch for, crave for satisfaction. Right? 
 
Questioner: I don’t think so. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You don’t think so. Why not, Sir? 
 
Questioner: I am not interest ed specially in sa tisfaction, but I would like to know 
why I am dissatisfied. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : (Oh! my lord!) How do you know that you are dissatisfied? 
Because you have kn own satisfaction! ( Laughter ) Don’t laugh Sirs, for goodness 
sake, don’t laugh. This is not a clever weaving of argument , please. Why am I 
dissatisfied? Because I am married and th at does not give me satisfaction; 
because I go to the temple and that doe s not give me satisfaction; (follow all 
this). I go to meetings and that means not hing; I look at tree s and feel nothing; 
and so gradually I am dissatisfied with ev erything I see, or have or have felt. 
Which means, what? I am seeking a satisfaction in which there is no 
dissatisfaction at all! No? This is not a clever statement; it is obvious, isn’t it? 
No, Sir? Look, each one of us  is seeking satisfaction a lthough he is dissatisfied. 
Right? Now, why do we seek satisfaction?—N ot that it is right or it is wrong, but 
what is the mechanism of this search? ( Long pause. ) Do you expect me to 
analyse it for you? 
 
Questioner: In some spheres we have  to seek satisfaction to live. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes Sir, of course there are basic necessities; but wait, Sir, 
before we come to that, can we find out why we seek satis faction? Go into it, Sir. 
What is satisfaction? Questioner: I think we need some of that  awareness of which you speak in order 
to distinguish for ourselves what will give us permanent happiness. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Don’t just use words, but think it out a little bit, ju st think it out. 
I do not know anything about awareness—out  it goes, if I may suggest it. We are 
not discussing that, Sir, nor are we talking about the permanent or the 
impermanent. We want to find out wh y we human beings are always seeking 
satisfaction. 
 
Questioner:  (The audience suggested many reasons but they were almost 
inaudible. ) We seek satisfaction because we want to change.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait a minute, Sirs, just a minute, Sir. Food satisfies you, 
doesn’t it—having a good meal? Why? Be cause I’m hungry, and it is good to get 
rid of the empty feeling. Move a little higher, up to sex. Very satisfying, 
apparently. You are all silent! Then, havi ng a position in whic h you can dominate 
others, that is also very satisfying, isn’ t it? You feel powerful, you feel you are in 
a position to order others to do things, an d so that is very sa tisfactory. One seeks 
different ways of finding gratificati on—through food, sex,  position, through 
various virtues, and so on. Why? One can understand when you want food that 
you feel gratified when you eat it, but wh y move to another level for satisfaction; 
and is there such a thing? I feel satisfied with food, I want varieties of food, and, 
if I have the money and a ppetite for it I get it. I also want a good position in 
society, a respected position, which is ve ry gratifying because there I am secure, 
with a big house, a policeman at the gate, and all the rest of it. After that, I want 
some more of it—a bigger house and two more policemen, and so on. Now, what 
is this craving for gratification? You under stand, Sirs, the craving, what is it? I 
have a craving for food and I eat it—if I can get it. But the craving for position—
let us take that one thing. Most of us want position—as the best engineer, or the 
best lawyer, or the President of some so ciety, or this or that. Why? Apart from 
the money it gives, apart from the comfort, why this craving? 
 
Questioner: I want to show  to others what I can do. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Which is, to make the neighbours feel envious! 
 
Questioner:  (Several interjections. Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : (Is that it? Wait Sir—you have not heard that other gentleman, 
Sir.) If you had not your po sition you would be  nobody. Strip the Pope of his 
robes, or the Sannyasi of his tamasha and he would be nobody. Is that it? So are 
we afraid of being nobody, and that is w hy we want position? To be considered a 
great scholar, a philosopher, a teacher? If you find yourself in that position it is 
very gratifying—to have y our name printed in the newspaper, and people coming 
to you and all the rest of it. Is that why we do all this? That is, inwardly we are 
just ordinary people with aching sorro ws, conflict, fighting in the family, bitterness, anxiety and fear which is th ere constantly. And to have an outward 
position where I am regarded as a te rribly respectable citizen, that is very 
satisfactory. Right? Why do I want this out ward position, I ask, and you say “I 
want it because in my daily life I am ju st a sorry little human being.” Right? Is 
that it? ( Long pause. ) 
 
Questions:  (Several inaudible suggestions.) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What is actually taking place? We have come to a certain point, 
Sir, let us pursue it; this point is that one finds that one wants a position which 
will be gratifying because inwardly one is... just a sh oddy little man. But to have 
a policeman at the gate gives me treme ndous importance. Right? This is obvious, 
isn’t it? We don’t have to  go into all that, do we? 
 
Questioner: We have to expose ourselves, Sir. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am exposing you now! You ma y not want to be exposed but 
that is the fact!—I am a so rry little entity inside, with a ll sorts of dogmas, beliefs 
in God, rituals and all that—a whirlpoo l of mischief and misery inwardly, and 
outwardly I want the policeman at the ga te! Now why do I have  this craving for 
outward position? Y ou understand? Why? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No Sir. Please go into it. Why do  we want? What is the reason? 
Don’t reduce it to the word “selfishness”, Sir. 
 
Questioner:  (Long inaudible contribution. ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, Sir. Look, Sir! Don’t you ha ve a craving for position, for 
power, for prestige, to be recognized as a great man, have fame, notoriety, and so 
on? Have you not got this desire? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible remark. ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You see how you are escaping from  this! Have you not got this 
desire, Sir? 
 
Questioner: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : At last! Now why? Go into it,  Sir. Why? Why do you crave for 
a position? Don’t say it is due to circum stances, that I have been put in that 
position by society, that I have been conditioned that way. 
 
Questioner: I desire position in the same way as when I am h ungry I want food. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Oh no, Sir! Oh no! You see we can’t face this thing at all! 
 
Questioner: Further suggestions.  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do let us be serious. Throwing in all these words is so silly. 
You are not really thinking at all. Sir, here is a very simple question. Everybody 
throughout the world wants a position—whether in society, in the family, or to sit 
next to God, “on the right-hand of th e Father”. Everybody wants a position. 
There is a craving for it. Why? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No Sir! Don’t throw out words.  Analyse it, Sir, don’t just 
answer! Why do you want it? 
 
Questioner: It is natural. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is natural? Oh Sir! You sa y one thing and then go on to 
another. Have you ever noticed animals, Sir? You’ve got a chicken yard; have 
you ever noticed that there is always one chicken pecking another? There is an 
order of pecking. So we have perhaps in herited this thing—to dominate, to be 
aggressive, to seek a position is a form of  aggression. No? Of course it is. I mean 
the saint who seeks a position with regard to  his saintliness is as aggressive as the 
chicken pecking in the yard! I don’t kno w if you follow all this. You don’t. 
Perhaps we have inherited this aggressive  urge to dominate, that is, to have a 
position. Right? And what  does this involve, this a ggression, to have a position in 
society (a position which mu st be recognized by othe rs, otherwise it is no 
position at all)? I must always sit on the platform. Why? (Pause ) Do please go on 
with it, Sirs. I am doing all the work. Why do you have this aggression? 
(Audience suggests something. ) No Sir. It is not a question of something lacking. 
Oh, how are we going to discuss with a group of peopl e who never want to go 
into anything. 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is one of the reasons, Sir. Bu t, let us look at this, Sir. There 
is aggression. Right? When I want a pos ition in society, which is recognized by 
society, it is a form of aggre ssion. Now, why am I aggressive? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You see, you do not apply it to yourself. You do not find out, in 
yourself, why you are aggressive. Forget  the “position in society” we have 
analysed that now. Why are we aggressive? 
 
Questioner: To reach what we want, what we aim at. KRISHNAMURTI : And what do you aim at? (We ha ve said that, Sir. We have 
moved away from that.) The question now is, why are we aggressive? Please go 
into it, Sir. The politician is aggressive, the big shots are aggressive, whether in 
business or in religion they are aggressive—why? 
 
Questioner: Aggressiveness arises from fear. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is that so? Maybe! Find out for yourself, Sir. You are aggressive 
in the family. Why? In the office, in th e bus, and so on. Why are you aggressive? 
Don’t explain it, Sir. Just find out why you are. 
 
Questioner: Why am I afraid to be nothing? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Look! As the gentleman said just  now, fear may be the cause of 
this aggression because society is so co nstructed that a citizen who has a position 
of respect is treated with great courte sy, whereas a man who has no position at all 
is kicked around—sent into the army and to Vietnam, to  be killed. So why are we 
aggressive? Is it because we are frightened  of being nobodies?  Don’t answer it, 
Sirs, go into it! Go into it in yourselve s! Or, we are frightened because it has 
become a habit. Seeking a position has become a habit. We are not really 
frightened, but it has become a habit. I don’t know if you are following this. If it 
is fear that makes us aggressive, that is one thing. But it may be the momentum of society that is making you aggressi ve. You know Sirs, they have made an 
experiment, putting rats, thousands of rats , in a very small room. And when they 
are there they lose all sense of propor tion. The mother who is about to have 
babies, the mother rat, does not care, becau se the pressure of space, absence of 
space, the fact of so many rats living toge ther makes them craz y. Follow this. In 
the same way, if people live in a very, very crowded city and have no space, it 
makes them also very aggressive, makes them violent. Animals do need space to 
hunt in; they have territorial rights, like the birds. They esta blish their territory 
and they will hunt any other animal that comes into that  territory. So they have 
territorial rights, and sexual rights—all animals have this. And sexual rights do 
not have such a great importance as territo rial rights. Right? Of course some of 
you may know all about this. So we ma y be aggressive be cause we have not 
enough space around us physically. Are yo u following all this? And this may be 
one of the reasons why we are aggressive. A family living in a small room, or a 
small house with ten of you in it, you ex plode, get angry about  nothing. So man 
must have space, and because he has not enough physical space, that may be one 
of the reasons for aggression. And also one may be aggressive because one is 
frightened. Now to which category do you  belong? Are you aggressive because 
you are frightened? 
 
Questioner:  (Suggestion inaudible. ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So, you are saying, guarantee my  physical security and then I 
will not be aggressive. But is  there such a thing as gua ranteed security in life? And so that may be the basic reason why we are frightened—knowing that there 
is no such lasting security. In Vietnam there is no security. You may have a little security here but where there is war there is no security  and, when an earthquake 
comes, it destroys everything—and so on. So, go into this yourselves, Sirs, and 
find out whether your aggression is born of fear, or of the fact that you are 
enclosed tightly, both outwardly and in wardly. Inwardly yo u have no freedom—
intellectually you are not free, you repeat what othe rs have said. Technological 
inventions, society, the community, all that  is felt constantly as a pressure on you 
which you are not capable of meeting and therefor e you explode, you feel 
frustrated. Now, which is it—to which ca tegory do you belong? Find out, Sirs. 
(Long pause. ) If you are frightened, and therefore you are aggressive, how are 
you going to deal with fear? And if you ar e free of fear will you lose the pleasure 
of being aggressive? And knowing that you will lose the pleasure of being 
aggressive, you do not mind being a fraid. Right? Do you follow this? ( Pause.) 
Fear is unpleasant and aggressiveness is more pleasant. Right? And so I do not 
mind being a little bit afraid because aggr essiveness with its pleasure balances 
fear. 
 
Questioner: I am aware of the difficulties of the situation. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Ah, I don’t know what you are aware of, Sir. Go into it. I am 
just asking you. So you ma y prefer to be aggressive, but at the same time be 
afraid. So you really don’t mind be ing afraid or being aggressive. 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sirs, this is a very difficu lt question because each one will 
interpret aggressiveness in his own way. But if we could face this question of 
fear and see if we can understand fear and see whether there is a possibility of 
being free from fear, then wh en that is gone through, then would there be 
aggressiveness—your kind, my kind, his kind  or her kind? You follow Sir? So let 
us take that one thing. Is fear causing aggressiveness? Obviously it is. I am afraid of not having any belief and therefore I am  aggressive about the belief I have. So 
fear has produced aggressiveness with re gard to belief! That is simple. Right? 
(Are you all having an early-morning sleep,  or what!) So, is it possible to be free 
of fear? (At last!) One only puts that ques tion when one really wants to be free of 
fear. Is it possible to live without fear? It  is a very complex problem. It is not a 
matter of saying, “Yes, we must live wit hout fear” and make a lot of platitudes 
about it. But can one live without fear? What does it mean ? Physically, what 
does it mean? We will go step by step. Wh at does it mean physically to live 
without fear? Is it possible, in  this society as it is constr ucted, in a culture of this 
kind, whether the culture is Communist or the present culture, or an ancient 
culture, is it possible to liv e in a society without fear? 
 
Questioner: It is not possible. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Why? Most extraordinary, Si rs! When one comes to basic 
questions you are all very silent. 
 
Questioner: I’m only thinking of what would happen to my life. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Are you afraid that if you had lasting security in a stable 
society, you would have no fear? ( Inaudible ) (Yes Sir. That is understood, Sir.) 
So, you will not be afraid if you can have a guarante e that the life, the daily 
existence you are used to will not be disturbed from the pattern  you are used to. 
Right? And on that basis we build a society. Obviously. That is what the 
Communists have done. So you say it is not  possible to live in  a society without 
fear. Is that so? No? 
 
Questioner: I think it must be possi ble but I don’t know how to do it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Ah! If you think it mu st be possible, that is only a concept. The 
fact is that one is afraid to live in  a society as it is, without fear. Right? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : (We are doing that, Sir. That is what we are discussing, Sir.) 
One of our fears is that to live in a society one has to be aggressive. Let us for the 
moment accept that—that to live in a soci ety of any kind, Communist, Capitalist, 
or Hindu or Moslem you have  to be aggressive and therefore frightened in order 
to survive at all. Leave it there. Now at what other le vel of our existence are we 
afraid? I can understand that I am afraid that I may not have enough food for 
tomorrow and therefore I lay up stores fo r a month or for two days and I am 
going to guard it and to see that nobody  steals it. And I’m afraid that the 
Government will come along and do something or other, and so I am afraid. I can 
understand that. Now are we only aggressi ve there, at that level? Are we only 
afraid at that level? 
 
Questioner: Inwardly we are also the same. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What do we mean by “inwardl y”? What does that mean Sir? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible. Several comments.) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So there is fear at another level. It is suggested that there is fear 
in relationship, and therefore we are aggr essive in relationship. Now why are we 
afraid in relationship? (I don’t know what  “truthful” means, Sir.) Why are we 
afraid in relationship? Are you afraid of your wife, or  your husband, or your 
neighbour, or your boss? I know it’s a ra ther awful thing to admit that you are 
afraid of your wife! One is afraid in every kind of relationship. Why? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) KRISHNAMURTI : Why am I afraid? Please do be simple about it because it 
becomes very complex presently and if we are not simple at the beginning we 
shall not understand anything . Why am I afraid of my wi fe or my neighbour, or 
my boss (which is relationship)—why? 
 
Questioner:  (Several comments, inaudible.) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : My dear chap you’re not marri ed! So leave it for the moment. 
Your calamity will come presently! 
 
Questioner: There is fear in relationshi p because “he” or “she” or “my boss” 
can withhold something from me.  (Further comment inaudible.) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : How are you going to discuss th is when you won’t go step by 
step! Don’t jump, don’t conclude. Are you  afraid of your neighbour, of your 
boss? Fear —you know. He might ta ke away your job. He  might not give you a 
rise, he might not encourage you. And al so you are maybe afraid of your wife 
because she dominates, she na gs, she bullies, she is not pretty. So one is afraid. 
Why? Because one yearns for continuity. Let us go slow er than that. I am sorry 
to insist on going very slow ly, step by step. I am afra id of my wife, why? I am 
afraid because—it is very simple—she bullies me and I don’t like to be bullied. I 
am fairly sensitive and she is aggressive , and I’m tied to her through ceremony, 
through marriage, through children. And so I am frightened. She dominates me 
and I don’t like it. Right Sirs? I am frightened for that reason, because I am fairly 
sensitive and I like to do things differently. I like to look at trees, I like to play 
with the children, I like to go to the office late, or do this or that, and she bullies 
me, and I don’t like to be bullied. So I have  the beginning of fear of her. Right? 
And also, if I retaliate and say “Don’t bully me” she will w ithhold her sexual 
pleasure, my pleasure with her. So I am frightened of that. Right Sirs? Still you 
are all very silent about this! You ar e an extraordinary generation! I am 
frightened because she wants to  pick a quarrel with me, and so on. So what shall 
I do? I am frightened and I am supposed to  be related to her. She dominates me, 
she bullies me, and she orders me about, sh e has contempt for me . And, if I am a 
strong man, I have contempt for her. You know! So what shall I do? I am 
frightened. Do I acknowledge that fact, or do I cover it up and say “It’s my karma”, “It’s my conditioning”, you kn ow—you complain against society and 
your environment. 
 
Questioner: I suppose one has  to suffer in silence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Suffer in silence! You do that anyhow. 
 
Questioner: Divorce her! 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Divorce is rather expensive and takes too long, so what will you 
do? Questioner: Put up with it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now what takes place? Follow it, Sirs. What takes place? You 
are frightened and you put up with it. So  what is happening to you? You are 
frightened and you get used to  this fear. You get used to  the bullying, used to the 
environment, so gradually you become duller and duller. Gradually you lose all 
sensitivity. You don’t look at trees which you looked at before, you never smile. 
So gradually you become dull. That is  exactly what has happened with you 
gentlemen and ladies. Because you have got used to it. Yo u have got used to this 
rotten society, to the filthy streets. You lo ok neither at the filthy streets nor at the 
lovely sky of an evening. So, fear (you r not having understood it) reduces you to 
dullness. What will you do, Sirs! Don’t just say “Yes, you’re perfectly right”. 
The doctor has diagnosed your disease an d he asks what you  are going to do. 
You have got used to the Upanishads, th e Gita, the dirt, the squalor, the bullying 
of the wife, the bullying of  the politicians, you have be come totally insensitive, 
dull. You may cleverly give lectures, and read and quote and all that, but 
inwardly you are dull. So what will you do? (Pause ) No answer? 
 
Questioner: Get rid of it all. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : How? With a lovely gesture? 
 
Questioner: Get rid of the relationship. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Walk out on her, and on the ch ildren? And fall into another 
trap? So what will you do, Sir? 
 
Questioner: Find out why she bullies me. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : She won’t tell me. She has her own miseries. She has God 
knows what problems. She is unsatisfied, perhaps, sexually. Perhaps she is ill—
Oh, a dozen things there may be. You know,  she feels she must have a rest, have 
a holiday, have some time without her hus band, away from him, take a holiday. 
So I can’t find out from her why she bullies me . I have to deal with myself, first. 
Gosh. You people are so... So, what shall I do? 
 
Questioner: Resist her. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I can’t do that. 
 
Questioner: Try to reconcile. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh my God! She keeps to her ch aracter and I keep to mine. So 
what shall I do? 
 
Questioner: You become indifferent. KRISHNAMURTI : That is what you have alre ady done. You are completely 
indifferent to everything —to the trees, to the beauty, to  the rain, to the clouds, to 
the dirt, to the wife, to the children. You are completely indifferent. 
 
Questioner: Maybe we have to doubt everything that we have accepted up to 
now. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Look Sir, it’s a much more serious problem than just this verbal 
exchange. Because you have become i ndifferent, callous—through fear, through 
bullying by the Gods, the Upanishads, th e Gita, by the politician, by the wife. 
You have become dull, haven’t you? So how do you awaken to this dullness and 
throw it out? You understand my question?  I have been made dull by my wife, 
by the repetitions of the blasted sacred books, by the society in which I live, I 
have become completely indifferent. I do n’t care what happen s to me or what 
happens to others. I have become callous , hard. I recognize that. That is a fact. 
You may not recognize it. You may say, “Well I may have little spots here and 
there which are fairly sensitive”. Those little spots have no value at all, when the 
major field is dull. So, what shall I do? I recognize that as a fact. And the 
question is not how to get rid of it! I don’t condemn it. I say, “That is a fact.” So 
what shall I do? Well, Sirs. What shall I do? 
 
Questioner: I feel helpless. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Then you cannot do anything, a nd then you have the whole state 
of India as it is! Now I want to do something; I really do. You, your Gods, your 
religious books, society, th e culture in which you have  grown up, all these have 
made me incredibly callous and indifferent . So what shall I do? Well, Sirs. What 
shall I do? 
 
Questioner: Break with the whole thing. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Break? I’m afraid to break, am I not? First of all, am I 
conscious, am I aware that I am indiffe rent? Are you, Sirs? (What a generation 
you are!) ( Long pause.) All right, Sirs, I will go th rough it. I have become 
callous, and I see the reasons for this in my wife, my family, overpopulation, the 
enormous weight of ten th ousand years of traditions, the endless rituals, the 
squalor inside the house an d outside the house, and so  on. I see the reasons why 
the mind has been made dull,  through education and so on. That’s a fact. Now 
what shall I do? First of all, I do not wa nt to live that way. Right? I cannot live 
that way. It is worse than an an imal. (Oh! you are not interested.) 
 
Questioner: Please go on. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So first I see the cause, and the effect, and I see it is impossible 
to live that way. Now what  makes me say, “It is impossible to live that way”? 
Please follow all this. (Sirs, please don’ t cough.) This requires great attention. What makes me say, “I must not live that way”? (Long pause. ) I am insensitive. 
If it is painful and I want to change, then I am changing because I think 
something else will give me greater pleas ure. (Oh! you don’t see all this!) I want 
to change because I see that a mind that is so dull is really not existing and there 
must be change. If I change because it is painful—follow this, please—if I 
change because it is painful then I am pursuing pleasure. Right? And the pursuit 
of pleasure has been the cause of this indifference. This indifference has been 
caused because I have sought pleasure—ple asure in the family, in the Gods, in 
the Upanishads, Koran, Bible, in the Establishment. And all that has reduced me 
to this—indifference . The origin of the movement was pleasure, and if I revolt 
against this it will again be  the pursuit of pleasure! 
Are you following all this? I have realized something! I have realized that if I 
change with a motive of pleasure I shall be  back in the same circle. Please, Sirs, 
do understand this—with your hearts, not with your silly little minds. Understand 
this with your hearts—that when you have started to seek pleasure you must end 
up in catastrophe, which is dullness. If you break away from that dullness 
because you want a different kind of pl easure then you are back in the same 
circle. So I say, “Look what I’m doing!” So I have to be very watchful of 
pleasure. I’m not going to deny it, becau se if I deny it I am seeking another, 
greater pleasure. So I see that pleasure reduces the mind to habits which bring 
about complete dullness. I hang up that picture on the wall because it has given 
me great pleasure. I have looked at it in the museum or in the gallery and I say, 
“What a lovely picture that is!” I buy it, if I have the money, and hang it up in my 
room. I look at it every day—and say “H ow nice”. Then I get used to it. You 
understand? So the pleasure of looking at it every day has brought about a habit 
which now prevents me from looking. I don’t  know if you see this. Like sex! So 
habit, getting used to something, is the beginning of indifference. Are you 
following all this? You get used to the sq ualor of the next village as you pass it 
every day. The little boys and the little girls making me sses on the road—the dirt, 
the squalor, the filth. You get used to it, and then you have  got used to it. In the 
same way you have got used to the beauty of a tree, you simply do not see it any more. So, I have discovered that where I pursue pleasure  there must be, deeply in 
it, the root of indifference.  Oh! do please see this! Ther e are no roots of heaven in 
pleasure, there are only roots of indifference and pain. 
So what shall I do if I see that very clearly? Pleasure is such an enticing 
thing! You understand ? I look at the tree: it is a great  delight. To see a dark cloud 
full of rain and a rainbow, and this seems a tremendous thing. That is a pleasure, 
that is a delight, that is a tremendous enjoyment. Why can’t I leave it there? You understand? Why do I have to  say, “I must store it up ”? (I don’t know if you are 
following all this.) Then when I see the next day the dark cloud, full of rain, and 
the leaves dancing in the wi nd, the memory of yesterday spoils the sight of it. I 
have become dull. So what shall I do? I cannot deny pleasure, but this does not 
mean I indulge in pl easure. So I understand now that  pleasure inevitably breeds 
indifference. I see it. I see it as a fact as I see the mi crophone—not as an idea, not 
as a theory, not as a concep t, but as an actual fact. Right? So now I am watching 
the operation of pleasure. You follow? Th e process of pleasure is what I am watching. As, “I like you” and “I do not lik e someone else”, which is again in the 
same pattern. All my judgments are ba sed on likes and dis likes. I like you 
because you are respectable. I do  not like you because you are not respectable. 
You are a Muslim, or a Hind u, or you have sexual perv ersions and I prefer the 
other perversions—and so on. You follow? Like and dislike. So I watch it. And 
like and dislike is again a habit, which I have cultivat ed through pleasure. The 
mind now is watching the whole movement of pleasure, and you cannot watch it 
if you condemn it. Are you following this? So what has happened to my mind? Watch it, Sir. What has happened to my mind? (Oh! you just throw out words . 
You don’t know what you are saying.) (T hat’s right, Sir.) It has become much 
more sensitive. Right? Ther efore much more in telligent. Now that  intelligence is 
operating—not my intelligence or your intelligence, just in telligence. I do not 
know if you are following this. Before, there was indifference and I did not care. 
The mind did not care two pins whether I lived like a pig or not. And I realized I 
must change. And I see that to change to a greater pleasure is to come back to the 
same filth. So the mind has realized so mething, seen something. Not because 
somebody has spoken of it—but it has se en something very clearly—that where 
there is the pursuit of pleasure, this mu st inevitably breed indifference. So the 
mind has sharpened. And it is watching pleasure in every movement. And you 
can only watch anything freely, without re servation, condemnation, or judgment. 
So the mind is watching. And it says “W hat is wrong with me, why can’t I look 
at a tree, why can’t I see the beautiful f ace of a child or a woman?” I can’t shut 
my eyes—blindly go running away  to the Himalayas. It is there . Right? So what 
shall I do? Not look? Turn my head when I pass a woman? (Which the Sannyasis 
do, they know all the old tricks and all th at.) So what shall I do? So I look. You 
understand? I look. I look at that tree, th e beauty of the branch , the beauty of the 
curve of the tree. I look at a beautiful face, well proportioned, the smile, the eyes. 
I look. Follow this. When I look , there is no pleasure. Have you noticed it? Have 
you got it? Have you understood what we  are talking about? When I look, where 
is there room for pleasure? I don’t look wi th fear, saying “My God! Am I caught 
in the trap of pleasure!” Bu t I look, whether it is at th e tree, the rainbow, the fly, 
or a beautiful woman, or the man. I look.  In that look there is no pleasure. The 
pleasure only arises when thought comes in. 
Now without understanding  this whole process—the saints, the ugly, 
immature human beings called saints, the Rishis, the writers, they have condemned this. Don’t  look, they say. And so— look. And when you see very 
clearly there is neither pleasure nor disple asure. It is there. The beauty of the 
face, the walk, the dress, th e beauty of the tree. A se cond later thought comes in 
and says, “That was a beautiful woman”. And all the imagery, sex, intimations, 
thrills, begin. Are you follo wing all this, Sirs, and what are you going to do about 
it? What happens? Thought comes in, and wh at is important now is not pleasure, 
because that is understood, there is not hing to it. Look what  has happened. The 
mind has become extraordin arily sensitive, and theref ore highly disciplined, 
highly disciplined but not through an imposed di scipline. By watching that I am 
callous, indifferent—watching it, a nd watching it—the mind has become 
sensitive. Watching is the discipline. I wonder if you have got this! In this kind of discipline there is no suppression; there is no suppression in the discipline that is 
necessary in order to see. So the mind has become highly sensitive, highly 
disciplined, and therefore austere—not the austerity in re gard to clothes and food, 
all that is too immature and childish. And the mind now sa ys it is watching 
pleasure and it sees that the continuity of pleasure is created by thought. Right? 
So I have entered into a totally di fferent dimension. You understand? A 
dimension in which I have to work very hard and which nobody is going to tell 
me about. I can tell you, but you have to work for yourself. So I say—“Why does 
thought come into this at all ?” I look at that tree, I l ook at a woman, I see that 
man going by in a rich car, a nice car, driven by a chauffeur, and I say “All 
right”. But why does th ought come in? Why? ( Long pause ) (Audience makes a 
suggestion. ) No Sir, no Sir. I haven’t learnt the art of looking . Do listen to this. I 
haven’t learnt it. When I said “I see i ndifference, callousness” I had not really 
seen it. Seeing it—not changing callousness , but just to see it. So now, I am 
asking myself, “Why does though t come into the picture at  all?” Why can’t I just 
look at that tree, or that woman, or th at car? Why? Why does thought come into 
this? 
 
Questioner: Memory comes as a barrier. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Ask yourself  the question, Sir, and don’t just say “Memory 
comes as a barrier”. You have just h eard somebody else say that. You heard me 
say that a dozen times, and you repeat a nd throw back those words at me. They 
have no meaning to me any more. I am asking quite a different question. I am 
asking why thought come s into it at all. ( Suggestion from audience. ) Ask 
yourself, Sir, and find out the answer. Why this consta nt interference of thought? 
You understand Sir? It is ve ry interesting if you go in to it for yourself. At present 
you cannot look at anything  without thought, withou t an image, without a 
symbol. Why? (Long pause ) Do you want me to answer it? The gentleman sits 
very comfortably and says “Yes”. “Ple ase answer it, will you?” And it’s not 
going to make a pennyworth of difference to him. (That’s right, and it has 
become a habit. For the last fifty years,  doing whatever you have done.) If it is a 
habit, then what shall I do? Do I see the ha bit as an idea or actually  as habit—Do 
you see the difference? If you do then you must find out. 
 
MADRAS  
5 JANUARY 1968 3 
 
 
TIME, SPACE AND THE CENTRE  
 
 
The ideal, the concept, and “what is”. Need to understand suffering: 
pain, loneliness, fear, envy. The ego-centre. The space and time of the 
centre. Is it possible not to have an ego-centre and yet live in this world? “We live within the prison of  our own thinking.” To see the 
structure of the centre. To look without the centre. 
 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What shall we consider together this morning? 
 
Questioner: What is psychological me mory, and how is it imprinted on the 
brain? 
 
Questioner: Will you go into the s ubject of pleasure and thought? 
 
Questioner: What is the concep t of life, and of this world? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do you want to discuss that? “W hat is the concept of life and of 
this world?” And also, what is the thinke r, and thought... What do you say, Sirs, I 
don’t mind what we discuss. 
 
Questioner: Can we continue talking about though t? The last talk  ended with the 
problem of time and space. 
 
Questioner: Could we talk a little more, explain more, about time, space and the 
centre, which we were ta lking about the other day? 
 
Questioner: Why is it we want to discu ss something from “the other day”? That 
is over. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Perhaps if we discuss this que stion of a concept of life, and 
living, we shall come upon the question of time, space and the centre. I think that 
all the other questions will be  included in that. What is the concept of life? What 
do we mean by concept, th e word? To conceive, to imagine, to bring out. A 
conceptual world is a world of ideas, fo rmulas, a world of th eories, a world of 
imaginative ideological form ation. That is what we mean, don’t we, when we 
talk about concepts? A concep tual world, an ideological world. First of all, what 
is its place in our relations with others , in the context of living? What is the 
relation between the conceptual world, wh ich we have more or less described or 
verbally explained, what is the relations hip between that, and actual daily living? Is there any relationship at all? I have to othache; that is an obvious fact. And the 
concept of not having toothache is an unreality. The fact is, I have it. The other is 
a fictitious thing, an idea. Now what re lationship has the reality, the “what is”, 
the actual daily living, to the formula, the concept? Has it any relationship? You 
believe, at least some of y ou, the Hindus, believe that there is the Atman. (We are 
on a touchy subject.) That there is some thing permanent. That is an idea, a 
theory, a concept, is it not? No? Shankara or the Vedantas or some bird said that 
there is this Atman, or whatev er it is, the spiritual entity. That is just an idea, isn’t 
it? 
 
Questioner: Much more than that. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Much more? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is said that there is some perm anent thing... 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : (I do not assume, Sir.) There is th is theory, Sir, the concept that 
there is a permanent state, a reality within each one, God, or whatever you like to call it. The Christians, the Muslims all sa y so, and different people use different 
words. Here you use a series of words. Now, is that not a concept which has no reality whatsoever? 
 
Questioner: Now it is a concept, but in the course of time we hope to discover that thing for ourselves. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : When you postulate that there is  a certain thing, a something, 
then you will inevitably disc over it! Psychologically, the process is very simple. 
But why state anything at all? 
 
Questioner: I am in love with the most beautiful woman in the world, but I have 
never seen her. Although I have not seen her it is a fa ct that she is beautiful. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh, come off it, Sir. It’s not a bit like that. This will lead to 
cuckoodom. We have ideologies, concepts—t he ideal of perfect man, the ideal of 
what should be, how the lib erated person should act, th ink, feel, live and so on. 
But these are all concepts, aren’t they? 
 
Questioner: Surely what you call “what is” is also a concept! 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is it? When you have  actual toothache, is that a concept: when 
you are actually miserable because you have  no job, no food, is that a concept? When someone dies whom you love and you are in great sorrow, is that a 
concept? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What! A toothache is unreal?  Where do you all live? When 
death comes in old age, or through an ac cident you break a leg, or whatever it 
is—is that theoretical, problematical? Is  it a concept? Sir, we are dealing now 
with concepts. A concept of lif e. Why do you want concepts? 
 
Questioner: To qualify life. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Why should I qualify life? I live, I suffer. 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s just it. “How do you go  about it, to conceive life?” Why 
do you want to conceive life; about what things should be  like? What is the 
reality about life, you ask. Th e reality of life is there, it is misery. There is pain, 
there is pleasure, there is despair, there is agony. 
 
Questioner: They are only apparent. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What do you mean, “only appare nt”? Oh, you mean it is an 
illusion! You mean that there is nothing like pleasure, pa in, war? That this is a 
lovely world? ( Laughter. ) When they take away your job you say there is no such 
thing, do you! When you ha ve no food, you say that that is an illusion, do you? 
No? Then what are you talking ab out? You say it is not real? What do you mean? 
You say a concept is a means to an end?  Really this is a most extraordinary 
world. What are we all talking about! We very carefully an alysed that word 
“concept”, what it means. Right? The gentleman says many people need the 
concept. Well keep it, Sir, keep it. 
 
Questioner: I did not say th at. I said many people ne ed to understand the word 
“concept”. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We explained it just now. So let us get on with it. We asked 
what relationship the concept has with daily living. Daily living is the daily grind 
of going to the office, the daily grind of the torture of  loneliness, misery and so 
on. What relationship has that, which is the actual, which is what is, which is 
what is going on every da y in our lives, what has that to do with the concept? 
 
Questioner: Can I say something? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Delighted, Sir. You take the field. 
 Questioner:  (Long speech. Inaudible.) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Ah! He says if we really unde rstood the concept, life would be 
different, and he quoted some othe r gentleman, I do not know whom. Why 
should I understand concepts ? When I am full of misery , when I have no food, 
when my son has died, when I am dea f, dumb, stupid—what has the concept got 
to do with all that? Concept being the word , the idea, the theory. What has that to 
do with my aching loneliness? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What Sir, what Sir! I think we mu st get on with it, otherwise we 
shall get nowhere. We are unwilling to face facts and we spin around with a lot 
of words. Reality is not a concept; realit y is my daily life. Right? The reality is 
that I am in torture, and pain is not a theory, is not a concep t, it is an actual 
process in life. So I say to myself—why do  I have concepts about pain? It is such 
a waste to have concepts about pain. So I do not want concepts, I want to 
understand pain. Right? 
The problem then is—what is  pain? There is physical pain, such as toothache, 
stomachache, headache, and dis ease, and also there is pain at a different level, at 
the psychological level. Now,  how am I to be free of that? Free of inward pain. I 
can go to a doctor to be cured of physical pain. But there is psychological pain in 
the sense that I suffer. What  do I suffer? What does on e have pain about, Sir? 
 
Questioner: Loneliness and fear. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Right! Loneliness and fear. And I want to be free of it, because 
this loneliness and fear are always a burden, they darken my thinking, my 
outlook, my vision, my way of acting. So, my problem is how to be free from 
fear, not from any theory; that has gone  overboard. I do not accept any theory 
about anything. So, how do I get rid of f ear? Will a concept help me to get rid of 
fear? It is what you were saying earlier, Sir; but will having a concept about fear help me to get rid of that fear? You say “Yes”, you say “it is a scientific 
thought”, “it is a basis for reality”, it is a “logical conclusion”. Do take a simple example, Sir, and work it out for yourself. Don’t introduce scientific, logical and biological facts. There is fear; will a conc ept of no-fear help you get rid of fear? 
Sir, don’t theorize about it. You have a fe ar, haven’t you? No? Don’t just throw 
words about. You have fear, do n’t you? Will a concept help  you to get rid of that 
fear? Do think it out, Sir; go into it. Do n’t go back into some theory, Sir. Do 
please stick to one thing. There is fea r. You are afraid of your wife; you are 
afraid of death, afraid you might lose your job. Will any theory, concept, help 
you to get rid of those fears? You can escape from them. If you are afraid of 
death you can escape from that fear by belie ving in reincarnation,  but fear is still 
there. You don’t want  to die, though you may belie ve in all kinds of stuff, the 
fact is that fear is s till there. Concepts do not help to get rid of fear. 
 Questioner: They may gradually  help us to be free. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Gradually? By that time you will be dead. Sirs, don’t theorize, 
for God’s sake. These useless brains that theorize! 
 
Questioner: Is it not escaping al so to try and get rid of fear? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh, how childish we are! You can escape from your wife, but 
your wife is still at home. 
 
Questioner: You can change your way of life. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sirs, do please let us be simple  about this, you know what fear 
is, don’t you? You know what violence is, don’t you? Will a theo ry of non-
violence help you to get rid of violence ? Take that one simple fact. You are 
violent; that is a reality. In your daily life you are violent, an d will that violence 
be understood through a concept, the concept of non-violence? (Long pause.) 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible long speech. ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What are you saying, Sir! We ar e speaking English! Do you 
understand English, Sir? We are talki ng about violence. Have you ever been 
violent, Sir? 
 
Questioner: Sometimes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Good. Now did you get rid of violence by a concept? 
 
Questioner: Seeing that one is viol ent one tells oneself to be calm. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I wonder if we are talking the same language. I give it up! You 
go on, Sir. 
 
Questioner:  (Continues inaudible statement.) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : All right, Sir. You win. 
 
Questioner:  (Further inaudible speech. ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Thank God, Sir, you don’t rule the world. You are losing time. 
You are wasting time. You are living in a world which is so unreal. 
 
Questioner:  (Continues to harangue. Inaudible. ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is what we ar e saying, Sir. Face the fact itself. And you can 
only face the fact if you ha ve no theories about the fa ct. Right? And apparently you gentlemen of the older generation do not want to face the fact. You like to 
live in a world of concepts. Please live  there, Sirs. Now let us proceed. The 
question is, is it possible for the mind to be free of fear? Now what is fear? We 
feel afraid. (We are coming back  to your question, Sir.) (Not your question, Sir. 
You want to live in a world of theories ; live there. I am answering this other 
gentleman.) You ask who is the entity or the being that says “I am afraid”? You 
have been jealous, haven’t you, envious? An d who is the person who says “I am 
envious”? 
 
Questioner: The ego. There is a sense of the ego. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now who is the ego? Sir, do anal yse it. You know what analysis 
is? Go into it, step by step. Who is it? Think it out Sir, and don’t quote Shankara, 
Buddha or X Y Z! When  you say “I am afraid”, who is the “I”? 
 
Questioner:  (Several inaudible suggestions.) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Don’t quote. Do  think it out, Sirs. 
 
Questioner: Is it not thought that concei ves of itself as bein g permanent at the 
moment it is envious? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now, what is that moment when  that thought regards itself as 
permanent? I am envious. I am consciou s that I am envious. Now who is that 
entity, that thought whic h says “I am envious”? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh please, Sir! You do not analyse it; you just make a 
statement! Do go into it, Sir. You say that at that moment , when that thought 
makes the statement “I am jealous”, that th ought, for the time being, thinks itself 
permanent. Right? Now, why does that t hought think it is permanent? Is it not 
that the thought has recogn ized a similar feeling which it has had before? Go 
slowly, step by step. I am envious. You k now what envy is—I become aware that 
I am envious, now I am asking—“Who is the entity that has become aware? And 
how does that entity or that  thought know that it is ‘envy’?” That thought knows 
that it is envy because it ha s felt envy. The me mory of previous envy comes up 
and the person who feels it says, “Here it  is again.” Right? Here is the envy 
which I have had before. Otherwise yo u would think of it quite differently. 
Because thought was able to recognize the feeling, it was able to call it “envy”. It 
had experienced the same feeling before. So it says (“it” being thought)... 
(Interruption from audience. ) Sirs, I know it is very complex so we must go 
slowly step by step. (Sirs, would you mind getting the coughing over—all of you 
at once.) ( Laughter) This is a very difficult ques tion to go into and unless you 
give it your full attention you cannot und erstand its very intricate and subtle 
nature. We say—first of all there is e nvy; one becomes conscious of that envy; then thought says, “I have had that fee ling before.” Otherwise you would not be 
able to recognize that feeling which you have called “envy”. What one has had as 
an experience before is given permanency, continui ty through recognition of 
what is taking place now. So, thought has continuity beca use thought is the 
response of memory. Right? That thought,  which is the outcome of yesterday’s 
memory says, “Here it is again; it is envy”. By calling it “envy” and recognizing 
it, it has given it greater vitality. Thought  is the response of the bundle of 
memories which constitute tradition, kn owledge, experience and so on, and that 
thought recognizes the feeling which it has now,  “envy”. So, thought is the 
centre , or the memory is the centre! Right? ( Pause ) Sirs, your centre says “It is 
my house, I live there, it belongs to me legally” and so on. You have certain 
memories, pleasurable and pa inful memories. The whole bundle of them is the 
centre, isn’t it? The centre being violen ce, ignorance, ambition and greed—it has 
pain, despair and so on. That centre creates space around itself. Does it not? No? 
(Interruption. ) (Go slowly, Sirs... An interval? ... Ah, the gentleman wants me to 
repeat what I have said. Sorry, Sir, I cannot  repeat it, I cannot remember what I 
said.) 
We will put it differently. There is this  microphone. Round it there is space. 
That is the centre, and it has space around it, and it exists in space; as this room 
has space within it. But also this room has space outs ide it. So the centre has a 
little space in itself, and also it has space outside it. (I am  not talking of creation. 
Just listen quietly.) Please observe this, Sir, please go into it, please observe it 
completely, not merely intellectually. It is  more fun if you act ually go into it. But 
if you theorize about it then the discussion can go on indefinitely and it leads 
nowhere. Here is the centre, and the cen tre is a bundle of memories. (It is so 
fascinating, Sirs. Please go into it.) The centre is a bundle of memories, a bundle 
of traditions, and the centre has been brou ght about by tension,  through pressure, 
through influence. The centre is the resu lt of time, within the field of culture—
Hindu culture, Muslim culture, and so on. So that is the centre. Now that centre, 
because it is a centre, has space outside it, obviously. And because of the movement, it has space in itself. If it had no  movement it would have no space. It 
would be non-existent. Anyt hing that is capable of mo vement must have space. 
So there is space, outside the centre and in it. And the centre is always seeking 
wider space, to move more widely . To put it differently, the centre is  
consciousness. That is, the centre has the borders which it recognizes as “the 
me”. As long as there is a centre, it must have a circumference. Of course. And it tries to extend the area of the circumfe rence—by drugs, which is now called the 
“psychedelic expansion of the mind”—t hrough meditation, through various 
forms of will, and so on. It tries to extend the space it is aware of as 
consciousness, to make it grow wider and wider and wider. But, as long as it is a 
centre its space must always be limited. Ri ght? So as long as there is a centre, 
space must always be confined—like a prisoner living in a prison. He has 
freedom to walk in the yard  but he is always  a prisoner. He may get a larger yard, 
he may get a better building, more comf ortable rooms, with bathrooms and all 
the rest of it, but he is still limited. As long as there is a centre, there must be the 
limitation of space, and therefore the centre can never be free! It is like a prisoner saying “I am free”, within the prison wa lls. He is not free. Many people may 
realize unconsciously that there is no such  thing as freedom within the field of 
consciousness, with a centre, and theref ore they ask whether it is possible to 
extend consciousness, expand  consciousness—by literature, by music, by art, by 
drugs, by various processes. But as long as there is a centre, the observer, the 
thinker, the watcher, whatever  he does will be within the prison walls. Right Sir? 
Please don’t say “Yes”. Because there is  distance between the border and the 
centre, time comes in, because he wants to go beyond it, transcend it, push it 
further away. I don’t know if you follow this? Sir, we are not dealing with theories, but if you do this actually inside yourself you will see the beau ty of this 
thing. 
 
Questioner: Would you go in to the tendency to expand? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You know what it means, to expand. A rubber band, you can 
stretch it, but if you stretch it beyond a certain point, it breaks. (Yes Sir. It will break beyond a certain point.) I feel, living in Madras in a little house, that there is no space there. With my family, wi th my worries, with  my office, my 
traditions—it is too deadly pe tty, and I want to break through it. There again is 
the desire to expand. And when society pr esses me in, drives me into a certain 
corner, I explode—which is again a revol t in order to expand. And when one 
lives in a small flat in a very crowde d street and there is no open country to 
breathe in and no opportunity  to go there, I become vi olent. The animals do this. 
They have territorial rights because they want space in which to hunt, and they 
prevent anyone else coming into  that area. Right, Sir? So, everything  demands 
expansion—trade, insects, animals and hum an beings, they all must have space. 
Not only outwardly, but inwa rdly. And the centre says, “I can expand by taking a 
drug.” But you don’t have to  take a drug to have an experience of this kind of 
expansion. I don’t have to take a dr ink to know what drunkenness is! I know 
what drunkenness is, I see it! I don’t have to take a drink! 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No Sir, please Sir, don’t bring in other things. This is very 
complex Sir. If you go slowly into it, you will understand it. The centre, being 
the prisoner of its own lim itation, wants expansion. It seeks expansion through 
identification—with God, with  an idea, with an ideal, with a formula, with a 
concept. Please follow this, Sir! And it thinks it can live differently, at a different level, though it is living in a miserable prison. So concepts become 
extraordinarily important to a prisoner, be cause he knows he cannot escape. And 
the centre being thought—we examined that—then though t tries to expand by 
identification with something —with the nation, with the family, with the group, 
with culture—you know, expand, expand. Bu t it is still living in prison! As long 
as there is a centre there is no freedom: right? (Don’t agree Si r. For you all it is 
just a theory, and one theory is as goo d as another.) So, see what it does! It 
invents time as a means of escape. I will gradually  escape from this prison. Right? I will practise, I will meditate, I w ill do this and won’t do that. Gradually, 
tomorrow, tomorrow, next life, the future. It has not only created space which is 
limited, but also it has created time! And it has become a slave to a space and a 
time of its own. Ah! Do you see this, Sirs? 
 
Questioner: How does memory...  (inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is very simple, Sir. You asked that question before. It is very 
simple if you look at it for yourself. So mebody hits you, in sults you, and you 
have a memory of that. I hit you, and you are hurt, you are insulted, you are made 
little and you dislike it, and that remains in  your brain, in your consciousness, the 
memory of me insulting you or flatteri ng you. So the memory remains and the 
next time you meet me you say to yours elf, “That man insulted me”, “That man 
flattered me”. The memory  responds when you meet me  again. That’s all, it’s 
very simple. Don’t waste time on it. 
 
Questioner: Where are we, after these discussions and talks? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I’m afraid I cannot tell you. If you understand what is being said 
and live it  then you will be in a totally different world. But if you don’t live it, 
daily, then you will just be liv ing as you are. That’s all. 
So first the problem is that as long as there is a centre, and we know what we 
mean by “the centre”, there must be time a nd limited space. That is a fact, as you 
can observe it in your daily life. You are bound to your house, to your family, to 
your wife, and then to the community, to so ciety, and then to your culture and so 
on and so on. So this whole thing is the centre—the culture, the family, the 
nation—that has created a boundary, which is consciousness, which is always 
limited. And it tries to expand the boundary , to widen the walls, but the whole is 
still within the prison. So that is the first thing, that is what is taking place actually, in our daily life. Then the question arises (p lease listen, don’t answer 
theoretically because that has no value), is it possibl e not to have a centre and 
live in the world? That is th e real problem. Is it possible not to have a centre and 
yet live completely, fully, in th is world? What do you say? 
 
Questioner: One could be just a point. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But a point is still a centre! No, Madame, don’t answer this 
question. If you just answer it m eans you have not gone into it. 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s it. I knew you’d say that, Sir; but you are still within the 
circumference. You don’t... You keep on...  Sir, have you ever  been to prison? 
Not you, Sir, personally. Have you just visited a prison? If you have visited a 
prison you will have seen that they are expanding the walls. Bigger rooms, bigger 
prisons, more and more. But you are still within a prison. A nd we are like that. We live within the prison of  our own thinking. With our misery, our culture, 
saying “I’m a Brahmin, a non-Brahmin, I ha te this, I like this and I do not like 
that, I love this and not that ”, and so on. We live within this prison, I may expand 
it a little bit but it’s still a prison. So this  question arises (please don’t answer, 
because this is a very fu ndamental question, which you  cannot possibly answer 
glibly by a few words) you have to find out in life, in daily living. So we are 
asking: “Is it possible to live in this wo rld, completely doing your job, doing 
everything with tremendous vitality , without a centre, knowing what the centre 
is, and knowing that to live in this worl d you need memory?” You see this, Sir? 
You need memory to go to the office, to function ther e. If you are a merchant 
you need a memory to cheat others or not, whatever you do.  You need memory, 
and yet to be free of the memory which creates the centre. S ee the difficulty?... 
So what will you do? ( Interjection. ) Sir, please don’t an swer, you’re back to 
theories. When I’ve got a toothache, st omachache, or I’m hungry and I come to 
your house, what do you give me? Theories? Or chase me out? Here is a 
tremendous problem. It is not for India al one. It’s a problem round the world, a 
problem of every human being. 
Now, is there a method to get rid of  the centre? You follow? A method? Is 
there? Method belongs to time, obviously,  and therefore a method is no good, 
whether it is the method of Shankara, B uddha, your pet Guru, or no Guru, or you 
invent it. Time has no value and yet, if  you are not free from that centre you are 
not free. Therefore you must always su ffer. So a man who says, “Is there an 
ending to sorrow?” must find the answer  to this—not in a book, not in some 
theory. One must find, see it. Right? So if there is no method, no system, no 
leader, no guru, no saviour—all introduc ing time—then, what will happen, what 
will you do? To have come to  this point, what has happ ened to your mind? What 
has happened to your mind which has i nvestigated this, very carefully, not 
jumped to conclusions, nor theories, nor saying “It is marvellous”; but when it 
has done  this, actually , step by step, has come to this point,  put this question, 
what has happened to such a mind? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh no. Please Sir. What has happened to your mind, if you have 
done this? No, no. It is something  that has happened to it. No, you’re only 
guessing, Sir. Don’t guess. It’s not a guessing game. Your mind has become 
highly active, hasn’t it? Because to an alyse so carefully, never missing a point, 
logically, step by step, you have to exer cise your brain, you have to exercise 
logic, you have to exercise discipline.  So the mind has become extraordinarily 
sensitive, hasn’t it? The mind, by observing what it is doing, what it has done, which is building up the centre, by me rely observing, the mind has become 
extraordinarily alert. Righ t? You have done nothing to make it alert, but by 
merely watching the movement of th ought, step by step, it has become 
extraordinarily clear. So, being clear, it puts the question, “How is the centre to 
disappear?” When it has put that question it is already seeing the whole structure of the centre. Seeing, actually visually , as I see that tree, I also see this. Questioner: What is the en tity which sees the action? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, I said the mind... You go back to something, Sir, I’m 
awfully sorry but we can’t go back. It is  no good going back to something which 
you have not actually lived  as we went along. You are inactive but think you 
have become active by putting a question like, “Who is th e entity that sees?” But 
you haven’t actually unders tood, observed, how the centre is formed—through 
memory, through tradition, through the culture one lives in, including religion 
and all the rest of it. The centre has be en formed through economic pressures, 
and so on. That centre creates space, cons ciousness, and it tries to expand. That 
centre is saying to itself  ( n o b o d y  e l s e  i s  a s k i n g  i t )  “I realize I am living in a 
prison, and obviously to be free from pain , sorrow, there must be no centre.” It 
sees this. The centre itself se es it—not somebody else above or below telling the 
centre. So the centre says, seeing itself, “Is it possible for me not to be?” ( Long 
pause. ) That means that we have to go back to this question of seeing. Unless 
you understand that, you can’t come to it. 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible suggestion. ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Ah, no, no, no. Seeing , without emotionalis m, sentimentality, 
like and dislike. Which does not mean th at you see something without feeling. 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible interjection. ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is what you all do, Sir. Yo u see that dirt on the road every 
day—and I have been here for the last tw enty or thirty years, and I see that 
squalor every day. Of cour se you see it without fee ling. If you felt, you would do 
something about it. If you fe lt the rottenness of the corrup tion in this country you 
would do something. But you don’t. If you saw the inefficiency of the 
Government, if you saw all the linguistic  divisions which are destroying this 
country, if you felt it, if you were passi onate about it, you would do something. 
You don’t. Which means you don’t see it at all. 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible interjection. ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Ah, no, no. “You see the bigger  life”—what’s the “bigger life”? 
You see how you want to tw ist everything to something else! You can’t look at 
anything in a straight way, simply, hones tly. So, unless you do it, we can sit here 
and discuss until Doomsday. What is seeing, is it this, is it that? But if you really 
saw the tree, without space and time, and th erefore without the centre, then, when 
there is no centre and you look at the tree,  there is vast space, immeasurable 
space. But first, one must learn, or watch, or hear how to look . But you won’t do 
it. You won’t begin the very complex thing called life, very simply. Your 
simplicity is to put on a loincloth an d travel third class and do so-called 
meditation, or whatever you do. But that is  not simplicity. Simplic ity is to look at 
things as they are—to look. To look at the tree, without the centre. MADRAS  
9 JANUARY 1968 4 
 
 
A FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION  
 
 
What is clear thinking in relation to daily living? Meeting the present 
with the past. How to live with memory and technological knowledge 
and yet be free of the past? Double life: temple, office. How to live without fragmentation?—to answer from a concept is further 
fragmentation. Silence before the immensity of a fundamental 
question. “Can you live so completely that there is only the active 
present now?” 
 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What shall we talk over this morning together? 
 
Questioner: Is not love a method? 
 
Questioner: Am I right in assuming, Sir, that time and space are one of our 
problems? 
 
Questioner: What is the relati on between memory and thought? 
 
Questioner: We must have memory in or der to function in daily existence, 
technological developments and so on, bu t is memory not also an impediment? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I don’t know if you have hear d the previous questions—I had 
better repeat them. First, has love a method? 
 
Questioner: Is not love a method? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is not love a method?—a lovely  idea isn’t it? What was the 
other? 
 
Questioner: The relation be tween thought and memory. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And your question, Madame, was—memory is necessary in 
daily existence, in technological developm ent and so on, but is  not memory also 
an impediment? Any more things  that you want to throw in? 
 
Questioner: We want to be aware of every thought, feeling and action, but 
thought, feeling and action go on being coloured and then are suppressed when 
the mind is silent. How can that take place? 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Is that really what yo u are all interested in? 
 
Questioner: We have disorder in our da ily life—how are we to go about bringing 
order? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We have disorder in daily life , how are we to set about bringing 
order? Is that right, Sir? 
 
Questioner: Or do we have to wait for a change to come of its own accord? 
 
Questioner: What is clear thinking? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : All right. Let’s take that up—sh all we? And we can answer your 
questions and bring them al l in. Is that all right? 
What is clear thinking? Shall we discuss that? And relate it, if we can, to our 
daily living. What is clear thinking? Is thinking ever clear? We had better not go 
too quickly. First of all, let’s find out what we mean by cl arity, and what we 
mean by thinking. What do we mean by clarity? Clear—when  you look  through 
the water on a lake and s ee the bottom of that lake you see everything very 
clearly, the pebbles, the fish, the ripples  on the water and so on. And you see 
very clearly, in bright light, the shape of the tree, the leaf, the branch, the 
flower—what do we mean by clarity? 
 
Questioner: A direct impression. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh! no. A definite outlined  impression, is that it? 
 
Questioner: Complete understanding. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Clarity means complete understa nding. We haven’t come to that 
level yet. We are talking about what  we mean by that word “clear”? 
 
Questioner: Free of any obstruction. 
 
Questioner: To see things as they are,  actually see things as they are. 
 
Questioner: To see without space. 
 
Questioner: Sir, sometimes we don’t ge t clarity if we look at the moon and a 
cloud at the same time we see th e moon moving and not the clouds. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, we are talking about a word , the meaning of that word, its 
semantics. 
 
Questioner: More details. 
 Questioner: I think it has something to do with light, Sir, seeing. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, would you mind just waiti ng a minute to examine this 
before we say anything else? What do we mean by the word “clear”? I see you 
clearly. I see the trees, the stars of an evening, very clearly. 
 
Questioner: Without obstruction. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Without obstruction. When th e eye can see everything very, 
very clearly. The seeing—that is what we mean, when there is no obstruction, no 
barrier, no screen, no fog, and if your eyes  are short-sighted you put on glasses to 
see more clearly into the di stance and so on. Clarity—r ight—is that clear? I think 
we are clear as to the meaning of that word. 
Then what do we mean by thinking? 
 
Questioner: Reasoning. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Thinking Sir, what does it mean? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, look. The speaker is as king you a question. What is 
thinking? 
(Interruption from audience ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The speaker is asking you a question: what is thinking? 
(More interruptions ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The speaker is asking you: wh at is thinking? And you don’t 
even give space and time to find out what thinking is. A questi on is being put to 
you, it is a challenge to you. And you b ubble over! You don’t say, “Now how am 
I to find out what thinking  is? How does thinking take place? What is the origin 
or the beginning of thinking?” It is a ch allenge and you have to respond to it. 
And to respond to it you have to (if you want to respond to it adequately) you 
have to examine what thinking is, how it happens. The speaker asks you—what 
is thinking? And what does the mind do  when it receives this  challenge? Do you 
search? 
 
Questioner: What we are doing now. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do listen for a minute. You will have your chance, Sir. Give the 
poor speaker a chance. When that questio n is put to you what is the operation 
that your mind goes through? Where do you  find the answer to that question? 
 
Questioner: Mind. KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, watch it, think it out, go into  it. I ask you where you live or 
what your name is—your response is i mmediate, isn’t it? Why is it immediate? 
Because you have repeated your name umpteen times, thousands of times, and 
you know where you live. So  between the questioning a nd the answer, there is no 
time interval—right? It is immediate. I ask you what is the distance between 
Madras and Delhi or New York, and ther e is a hesitation—right? So you look 
into memory, into what you have learnt  or what you have read and you say, 
“Well the distance is so many miles”. So you have taken time between the 
question and the answer, there is a lag of time—right, Sirs? 
Now what happens when th ere is the question, “W hat is thinking?” How do 
you find that out? 
 
Questioner: It takes one’s mind to bring all the answers. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What do you do, Sir? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You probe into the memory and wh at do you get out of it? What 
is the answer? 
 
Questioner: We study it a little more and  more and then tr y to gather these 
extracts together. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir look, I am asking  you now, this mornin g, don’t wait until the 
day after tomorrow until you and I have go ne, or are dead, but I am asking you 
now—what is thinking? And you—either  you find out or you don’t know—
right? Which is it? 
 
Questioner: It is the process of a mind giving an answer. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What do you mean by the process of the mind? 
 
Questioner: Sir, what are you aiming at?—I don’t understand. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What am I aiming at? Just a minute Sir, you have asked a 
question. What am I aiming at? What I am  aiming at is very simple. I want to 
know, when that question is put, “What is thinking?”, I want to find out what it 
is. (Interruptions from audience.) Sir, give the other fellow a chance, don’t 
answer so readily. I want to  find out what thinking is —how does it come about, 
what is the beginning of it? Right? It is  very simple, Sir. Now what is it, how 
does it come about? That is, you as ked me a question—say, “What is 
thinking?”—and I really don ’t know—right? Or I do know, I know the whole 
process of it—how it operates, how it begi ns, what is its mechanism—right? No? 
 
Questioner: One feels how it operate s but I am unable to explain. KRISHNAMURTI : One feels how it operates but one is not capable of explanation. 
Look, take a very simple thing, Sir. I ask you what your name is. You hear the 
words and then what happens? 
 
Questioner: You really just answer. 
(Various comments—inaudible.) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You reply, don’t you? Say your name is so and so. What has 
taken place there? 
 
Questioner: I have referred to my memory and my memory responds. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s right, Sir, that’s all. Th e question—to that question your 
memory responds and replies—right? Now I ask you—what is thinking?—and 
why doesn’t your memory respond? 
 
Questioner: Because...  (inaudible ). 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It may be, Sir, go into it, find out—why don’t you reply what 
thinking is? Whether you k now or you don’t know. If yo u know, you will say, if 
you don’t know you will say, “So rry I don’t know”. Which is it? 
 
Questioner: I don’t know. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The gentleman doesn’t know. We are trying to answer the 
question, “What is clear thinking?” We more or less understood the meaning of 
the words clarity, clearness,  clear. And we are finding it rather difficult to find 
out what thinking is. We say it is the re sponse of memory to a challenge—right? 
And that response comes from accumulated memories, knowledge, experience. 
This is simple, Sir. You learn a langua ge after having heard it from childhood, 
you can repeat it because you have stor ed up the words, th e meaning of that 
word, the word in relation to the thing and so on, a nd you can speak because you 
have stored up the vocabulary, words, th e structure and so on. Memory responds 
and the response of memory is thinking. Now what is the orig in of thinking, the 
beginning of th inking? We know that after accumulating memory we respond 
and the response is thought. Now I want to find out also—that is, in order to find 
out what clear thinking is—I want to find out what is the beginning of memory? 
Or is that too difficult, too abstract? 
 
Questioner: It is our conditioning. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, I am afraid I am going too fast. Sorry. All right, Sirs. I 
won’t go into it. What is  thinking—we know now! So  when you respond, when 
thought is the response of  memory and memory is the past (the accumulated 
experience, knowledge, tradition, and so on) that response is what we call thinking, whether it be logical, illogical, ba lanced, unbalanced, sane, healthy, it is 
still thinking. Now, please follow the next thing, can th ought be clear? 
 
Questioner: No, it is always conditioned. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, do please find out. Can thought be clear? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You see you are just supposing.  You live on abstraction, and 
that is why you cannot be practical. You live on concepts, idea s and theories and 
when you move out of that field you ar e completely lost: when you have to 
answer something directly, of yoursel f, you muddle along. We asked, “Can 
thinking, which is the outco me of memory (memory is always the past, there is 
no living memory) can thinking, which is of  the past, ever be clear?” This is a 
very interesting question, Sirs. Can the past produce clear action? Because action 
is thought—right? 
 
Questioner: Yes, that is a fact. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sirs, have we understood the question? We have more or less 
analysed the word “clear”, and we have mo re or less analysed what thinking is. 
So the next thing we are as king is, can thinking (which is the outcome of a long 
past, which is not living, and is therefore always old) can that thing which is old, 
the past, ever be clear? You understand, Sir? If I do anything out of tradition, 
(which is the past, however noble, ignobl e, or stupid)—if I do  anything out of 
tradition, can that action be clear? 
 
Questioner: It cannot because memory  and tradition belong to the past... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am asking, Sir, can action bor n out of the past, the doing, 
which is always in the present, the doing , not “having done” or  “I will do”, but 
the actual doing—can it ever be clear? 
 
Questioner: The word action and the word clear have no thing to do with each 
other. “Clear” applies to seeing everything... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : All right. Can that action be fresh, new, direct, as direct as when 
you meet fire and you move away? So I am asking, “When we live and function 
in the shadow of the past , is there any clarity?” Leave action out because that 
disturbs you—I know why it disturbs you— because you are neve r used to acting, 
you are used to conceptual  thinking. And when you ar e faced with action, you 
get confused, because your life is confused, and that’s your affair. 
So, when you act from the past, from tr adition, is it action, is it something 
living? 
 Questioner: Why should there be any difference between clarity and action? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh! we can discuss this ad nauseam . But I am just asking, Sir. 
You are all tradition-ridden, aren’t you?—t raditionalists. You say this or that is 
sacred, or repeat some sloka, or, if you don’t do any of that, you have your own 
tradition, your own experience, whic h you go on repeating. Now does this 
repetition bring understanding, clarity, freshness, newness? 
 
Questioner: It is an aid to unde rstanding the present situation. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is the past an aid to understanding the present? 
 
Questioner: Things break down. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait Sir, wait Sir. Look at it. Does the past help you to 
understand the present? 
 
Questioner: The past is... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Just listen, Sir, what she has said. You have ha d thousands and 
thousands of wars, does it help you to  prevent all wars? You have had class 
division—Brahmin and non- Brahmin and all the hate involved—does the past 
help you now to be free of all caste? 
 
Questioner: It should. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It should—then we are lost! When  you say, “It should” it is an 
idea, it is not an action. You will st ill be a Brahmin, you will still be 
superstitious, you will still be violent. 
 
Questioner: People don’t want  to be free of the past. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It doesn’t matter if you are free or not—don’t be free of it, live 
in your misery. But if you want to understand this th ing called clear thinking and 
going beyond it, you ha ve to face certain things. If yo u say “Well, I don’t want to 
change my traditions”... 
 
Questioner: Can you not help us to at least make a...? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We are doing that, Sir, we are doing  that. Look Sir, if the past is 
a help, if tradition is a help, if culture is a help, to live no w, fully, clearly, 
happily, sanely and flower in goodness, the past then has a value—but has it? Do 
you, with all your tradition, live happily? 
 
Questioner: The past is like looking through smoked glass. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : That’s right. So the past  doesn’t really help you. 
 
Questioner: A little bit. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Don’t say “No”, because you are only speaking of another idea; 
unless you do it, cut yourself from the past, you can’t say “Yes, it is no good”. 
 
Questioner: We have the chan ce to understand you bec ause we have listened to 
you for years. A child has no such chance. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : “We have the chance to understand you because we have 
listened to you for forty years—a child hasn’t—and all the rest of it!” Why do 
you bother to listen to the speaker at all? Even for a day or, worse, for forty 
years? How tragic it all is! I don ’t know where you people live. 
And so let’s get back. When I am alwa ys looking over my  shoulder to the 
past, I can never see anything clearly in th e present, obviously. I need two eyes to 
look, but if I am looking over my shoulde r all the time, I can’ t see the present. 
What I need to do is  to look at the present, and I am not capable of looking at the 
present because I am burdened with the pa st, with my tradition. Tradition says to 
me “It is terrible to have a divorced wif e”; or my respectability  says to me “That 
person is terrible because he is not mora l”, (whatever that may mean). We all do 
this. So what happens to my affection, to my kindliness towa rds that person? My 
prejudice, which is tradition,  prevents me from being ki nd or affectionate to that 
person. 
The past may help in the fi eld of technology, but it do es not help in the field 
of life. I know this is theory  now and you will repeat that ad nauseam  and think 
you have understood it. So the question ar ises: as thought is of the past and I 
have to live completely in  the present to understand th e present, how is the past 
to be put aside and yet be useful? Th at is what your question was. You 
understood my question? I have to live , to live in this world, and I need 
technological knowledge to go to the offi ce—you know all that is involved in it, 
science, bureaucracy; this is the case if you are a professor or even if you are a 
labourer. And I see also—I have underst ood something this morning—that to 
live completely, fu lly, the past must not interfere; so  I say to myself, “How is this 
possible? How is it possible for me to li ve in the technolo gical world most 
efficiently, logically, with more and mo re technology, and yet live at another 
level, or even at the same level, with out the interference of  the past?” In the 
technological field I must have the past, in  the other field of life—no past. Do we 
see this? 
 
Questioner: Yes, now we  have an understanding. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Ah, good! And I ask myself (don’t laugh, Si r)—now I ask 
myself how this is possible. 
 
Questioner: Is a double life possible? KRISHNAMURTI : No, you see, what you are leading is a “double life”. You go to 
the temple, put on ashes; you know the set- up, ringing of bells and all the jingles. 
And at the same time you live at the te chnological level. You are leading a 
double life, and you say, “Is it possible?” Of course it is possible because you are 
leading it. We are not talking about a doubl e life. Examine the co mplexity of this 
problem, that one has to have technologi cal knowledge and that  there must also 
be freedom from knowledge, from the pa st. Now, how is th is possible? The 
double life which you are leading now is  in existence, and therefore you are 
making a hideous mess of life, you go to th e temple and at the same time run a 
machine. You put on ashes, or whatever yo u do, and go to the o ffice. It is a form 
of insanity. Now, how is this possible? Have you unde rstood my question, Sirs? 
You tell me how it is possible. Do you say it is not a double life? 
 
Questioner: To use the technological k nowledge only when it is necessary and 
not in other ways. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But you have to use such knowle dge all the time—to go to your 
office, to go to your home, to follow the road , when you look at a tree, when you 
do the bureaucratic job, and so on; this mental operation is functioning all the 
time. People don’t see this. You can’t divi de it, can you? Go slow, go slow. You 
can’t divide life into technological life a nd non-technological life. That is what 
you have done and therefor e you are leading a double life. So we are asking, “Is 
it possible to live so completely that the part is in cluded in the whole?” Right? 
Are you getting it? Now we lead a double  life, the part, we keep it separate, 
going to the office, learning a technology , all that, and going to church or the 
temple and ringing bells. So  you have divided life and therefore there is conflict 
in your life between the two.  And we are asking for quite  a different thing, to live 
so that there is no division at all. I don’t know if you see this? 
 
Questioner: You want us to... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, no, I don’t want you to do anything. 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh no, Sir. You are not meeting the question—please 
understand what the speaker is trying to convey. Don’t go back to something he 
has said about psychological memory and all the rest of it. That is a set of words 
you have learnt. Find out what the speaker is trying to explain now. Can I live a 
life in which there is no division at all (sex, God, technolog y, getting angry)—
you follow? A life in which there is no division, no fragments? 
 
Questioner: The moment there is an end to these things... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir—please Sir, don’t just throw out words. Now to continue: 
How am I, who live in fragm ents, many fragments not just two (my whole life as I live it is a fragmentary existence, whic h is a result of the past, which is the 
result of my saying, “This is right, that is wrong”, “This is sacred, that is not 
sacred” or “Technology and all that doesn’t  really matter, one has to earn, but 
going to some temple is endlessl y important”)—how can I live without 
fragmentation? You understa nd the question, Sir, now? 
How? (Not “according to what met hod”, because the moment you have 
introduced method you have introduced fragmentation). “How am  I to do it?” is 
the question, but you say immediately, “Tell me the method” and “the method” 
means: a method which you practise as opposed to something else and therefore 
the whole thing is back where we started.  So there is no method. But the question 
of “How” is merely asking, finding out, not searching for a method. Now, how is 
it possible so to live that there is no fragmentation at all? You understand my 
question, Sir? That means no fragmentation at  all at any level of my being, of my 
existence. 
 
Questioner: What is being, Sir? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What is being?—I am sorry we are not discussing that, Sir. You 
see you are not even paying attention. You pick up a word like “being” or a 
phrase like “what is the purpose of life”, a nd off you go. But that  is not what we 
are talking about. Look, Sir, how am I to live so that there is no fragmentation at 
all? I don’t say, “Well, I’ll go an d meditate”—which becomes another 
fragmentation, or “I must not be angry”, “I  must be this or that”; these sentences 
all involve fragmentation. Can I live with out any fragments, without being torn 
apart? Right, Sir? Have you understood the question? 
Now who is going to answer you? W ill you go back to memory? What the 
Gita said, what the Upanisha ds said, what Freud said, or somebody else said? If 
you went back and tried to find out what they said a bout living without 
fragmentation, then that would be  another fragment, wouldn’t it? 
 
Questioner: What of those who don’t seek their aid? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : If you do not seek their aid, then where are you? How do you 
find this out? How do you find out how to live so that there is no fragmentation 
at all? Oh, Sirs, you don’t see the beauty of this. 
 
Questioner: By integration. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I knew you’d give that answer. ( Laughter ) The questioner says, 
“By integration”—integrating with what? Integrating all the fragments together? 
Or putting all the pieces together? And wh o is the entity that is putting all the 
pieces together? Is it the Hi gher Atman or the Cosmos or God or the Soul or 
Jesus Christ or Krishna? All that is fra gmentation—you follow? So you have this 
challenge, and how do you re spond to it, that is of the first importance—you 
understand? You are challenged,  how do you respond to it? 
 Questioner: You work it out in life so that you become harmonious. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Ah, lovely! When? ( Laughter. ) 
 
Questioner: Every day. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : There is no day, every day. 
 
Questioner: Every morning. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now, look what you are doing. You are just adjusting yourself 
to the challenge. You ar e not answering it. ( Laughter ) How do you answer this, 
Sir? 
 
Questioner: It is not a ques tion of answering at all beca use we are trying to meet 
you with the word. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Find out, Sir, what you are doing.  Find out. Here is a challenge 
and you can’t go back to any books—right? You can’t go  back to your authority, 
the Gita and all that rubbish. So what will you do? You see I can go on 
explaining, Sir, but you will just accept it,  as you have accept ed so many things, 
and carry on. So let’s look at it. 
Here is a new challenge. The challenge being that I have lived in fragments 
all my life (the past, the present and the future, God and the devil, evil and good, 
happiness and unhappiness, ambition and no ambition, violence and non-
violence, hate, love and jealousy) these ar e all fragments; all my life I have lived 
that way. 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We have been through all th at, Sir. Give the speaker two 
minutes, will you kindly? 
Now, what is the answer? I have lived a fragmentary, destructive, broken life 
and now I have to live—now the challe nge put to me has been: “Can I live 
without any fragmentation?” Th at is my challenge. Now how do I respond to it? I 
respond to it by saying, “I really don’t know”—right? I r eally don’t know. I don’t 
pretend to know. I don’t pretend to sa y “Yes, here is th e answer”. When a 
challenge is put to you, a new challenge , the instinctive response—I do not mean 
instinctive—the right  response is humility: “I don’t know.” Right? But you don’t 
say that. Can you honestly say you don’t know? You can, good . Then what do 
you mean by that feeling, “I don’t know”? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Don’t answer it too quickly, find out. Use your brain cells. 
 Questioner: The recognition of fact, Sir. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I have recognized the fact, otherwise I wouldn’t even answer it. 
 
Questioner: I have no means of finding ou t. I do not know and I don’t know the 
means of finding out. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now wait. I don’t know—right? No w what is the state of the 
mind—please follow it, listen quietly—what is the state of the mind that says “I 
really don’t know”? 
 
Questioner: Lack of...? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh, there we are! You people are so dull. 
 
Questioner: I do not know. 
(Various comments—inaudible.) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh, you are so immature, like children in a class! This is a very 
serious question we are aski ng and you just throw in a lot of words, you haven’t 
even the humility to listen a nd find out for yourselves. 
 
Questioner: It is not easy, I don’t know. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : When we say, when you say, as  that gentleman said just now, 
he doesn’t know, what is the state of mind that has replied “I don’t know”? 
 
Questioner: Waiting. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You are—Sir, how old are you? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh, Sir. When I say “I don’t know”, I really don’t know. But 
am I waiting to find ou t, or waiting for somebody  to tell me—right? I am 
waiting. Therefore when I say “I don’t kno w”, it isn’t an actual fact that I don’t 
know, because I hope that somebody is go ing to tell me, or that I’ll find out. Do 
you follow this? Right. Then you are waiting, aren’t you? Why are you waiting? 
Who is going to tell you? Your memory? If your memory is going to tell you, 
you are back again in the same old rut. So what are you waiting for? So you say 
“I won’t wait”—you follow, Sir?—there is no waiting. There is no “in the meantime”—you follow this ? I wonder if you do. So  when you say “I don’t 
know”, it means nobody knows—right? Becaus e if anybody tells me, he will tell 
me out of fragmentation—n o? So I don’t know, therefore there is no waiting, 
there is no answer—right? So I don’t know. Then I find out what is the state of 
the mind that says “I don’t know ”—are you following it? It is not waiting, not expecting an answer, not looking to some memory, authority, it ceases—all that 
has stopped. Right? So the mind—follow it step by step—so the mind is silent in 
the face of a new challenge. It is silent because it can’t answer the new challenge. 
I don’t know if you are meeting th is; right, Sirs? (No. No. You don’t 
understand?) 
You know when you see a ma rvellous mountain, the be auty, the height of it, 
the dignity, the purity of it, it forces you to be sile nt, doesn’t it?—this may last a 
second but the very grandeur of it make s you silent. And a second later all the 
reactions begin. Now if you see the cha llenge in the same way—but you don’t 
because your mind is chattering—so you don’t see the importance or the 
magnitude of this question, which is: can I live (living meaning now, not 
tomorrow or yesterday, or a second afte r, or a second before) can I live without 
fragmentation? It is an immense qu estion—right? Why aren’t you silent? 
 
Questioner: Because I want to  live without fragmentation. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Ah—which means what? 
 
Questioner: I want to be out of it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Which means what? Go  into it. You don’t see the immensity of 
the question. All that you wa nt to do is to get into another state, therefore you 
don’t see the magnitude of the question. Wh y don’t you? Pursue it. You do see it, 
when you see a marvellous mountain, sparkling with snow in the clear blue sky 
with great, deep shadows, and absolute silence. Why don’t you see this in the 
same way? Because you want to live in the old way. You are not concerned with 
seeing the full meaning of th at question, but you say, “For God’s sake tell me 
quickly how to get there”. 
 
Questioner: I am already seeking th e solution of how to get there. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s right. So you are more concerned with the solution than 
with the question. Which means what? 
 
Questioner: I won’t get it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. Which means what? Look at it, look at it, don’t answer it 
yet—which means what? 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, Madame, stick to it. 
 
Questioner:  (Inaudible ) 
 KRISHNAMURTI : You have understood the question? You don’t see the 
magnitude of this question because you wa nt to reach it, get it, you are greedy. 
So your greed is preventing you from seeing the immens ity of it. So what is 
important? (Follow it step by step.) Not the immensity but your greed. Why are 
you greedy—about something which you d on’t understand at all? (You don’t 
mind, Sir, my pursuing what your daughter says like that?) 
 
Questioner: Satisfaction! 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now, see why. Why are you greedy, when you haven’t even 
understood what is involved in it? So you say, “How stupid of me to be greedy 
about something when I don’t know what it means”—ri ght? So what I have to do 
is not, not to be greedy, but to find out the implications, the beauty, the truth, the 
loveliness of that thing. Why don’t you do that, instead of saying “I must get it”? 
So you respond to a new qu estion, a new challenge, invariably from the old. 
Greed is from the old. Therefore is it po ssible to cut off the past entirely? You 
understand? It is the past that is fragmentary, that is  bringing about 
fragmentation, breaking up life. So my ques tion is: is it possible to be free of the 
past totally, so that I ca n live technologically? I don’t know if you follow this? 
Can I be free from the past, can I be fr ee from being a Hindu, Buddhist, Muslim, 
Christian, or anything else? Not “can I be”; I must be. It is stupid for me to 
belong to any caste, to any religion, to a ny group. Out it goes. There is no time to 
think about it as you suggested. Out it has gone—you follow? So it is possible to 
cut the past completely; if you can do it in one direction you can do it totally. 
Right? (Oh, no, you don’t see.) 
So, can you, from this moment, be free completely of your nationality, of 
your tradition, of your culture, of  your past? If you can’t, you live in 
fragmentation, and therefore everlastingl y life becomes a battlefield. And nobody 
is going to help you in th is. No guru, no Communist, no body is going to help you 
do it. And in your heart of hearts you know  this jolly well. Well, Sirs? So thought 
is always old—right? Discover this fo r yourselves, don’t repeat after me—
discover it. And you see what an extraord inary thing you have discovered. So if 
you discover this—that thought is really  old—then all the past—the Shankaras, 
the Buddhas, the Christ, the whole past is gone. No? But you don’t discover it. You won’t make the effort to discove r it; you don’t want to discover it. 
 
Questioner: No Sir, there is  the fear of being lost. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Well, be lost, you are lost anyhow! 
 
Questioner: Not completely lost. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But you are lost, Sirs. What are you talking about? You are 
terribly lost. It is only a lost  man that is everlastingly in  conflict. You are lost, but 
you don’t recognize that you are lost. So th ought is always old; then, what is it—
that is too difficult to go into now—I’ ll just put it forward and you will see for yourselves—what is it then that sees something new? You understand, Sirs? 
Thought is always old—follow it carefully—when the Adi Shankara, that old bird, said something, his thought was already old—do you und erstand? Therefore 
what he said was never new, he repeated  in his own coinage of words something 
which he had heard, and you repeat it afte r him. So thought is never new and can 
never be new, and living now, every day, is some thing which is the active 
present; it is always active, in the presen t. Therefore when you try to understand 
activity in the present, with  the past, which is thought,  then you don’t understand 
it at all; then there is fragmentation, and life becomes a conflict. So can you live so completely  that there is only the active present now? And you cannot live that 
way if you haven’t understoo d and thereby cut yourself  off completely from the 
past, because you yourself are the past. Yo u see you will unfort unately go on just 
listening—if I happen to come next year  you will repeat the same old stuff. 
 
Questioner: Sir, if we are not in the past,  but in the present,  does that not also 
become the past and the fu ture—how are we to kn ow that we are right? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You don’t have to be sure you are right—be wrong! Why are 
you frightened about being right or wro ng? But your question has no validity at 
all because you are just talking, you are just theorizing. You are saying, “If this 
happens, that would happen”. But if you put it into action then you would know 
there is no such thing as “going wrong”. 
 
Questioner: Sir, when we go back home  we see our childre n and the past comes 
in. 
 
Questioner: Shankara may go. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I hope it has gone. Shankara may go but the children remain. 
(Laughter) Are the children the past? They ar e in one sense. And as they are 
living human beings, can you educate them to live completely, in the way we are 
talking about? 
 
Questioner: Right Sir, y ou have answered it, sorry. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That means I have to help them to be intelligent, I have to help 
them to be sensitive, b ecause sensitivity, highest se nsitivity is the highest 
intelligence. Therefore if there are no schoo ls around you, you ha ve to help them 
at home to be sensitive, to look  at the trees, to look at the flowers, to listen to the 
birds, to plant a tree if yo u have a little yard—or if you have no yard to have a 
tree in a pot and to look at it, to cherish it, to water it, not to tear its leaves. And 
as the schools do not want them to be se nsitive, educated, intelligent (schools 
only exist to pass exams and get a job) you have to help them at home, to help 
them to discuss with you,  why you go to a temple, why you do this ceremony, 
why you read the Bible, th e Gita—you follow?—so that  they are questioning you 
all the time, so that neither you nor anyo ne else becomes an authority. But I am afraid you won’t do any of this because the climate, the food, the tradition is too 
much for you, so you slip back and lead a monstrously ugly life. But I think, if 
you have the energy, the drive, the pa ssion, that is the only way to live. 
 
MADRAS  
12 JANUARY 1968  
 
 
 
 
 
 
EUROPE  
 
VII 
 
Seven Talks in Saanen, Switzerland 
 
 
1  What is your overriding interest? 
2  Order 
3  Can we understa nd ourselves? 
4  Loneliness 
5  Thought and the immeasurable 
6  The action of will and the energy  needed for radical change 
7  Thought, intelligence, and the immeasurable 1 
 
 
WHAT IS YOUR OVERRIDING INTEREST?  
 
 
Passion and intensity needed. The inner and outer: can they be 
divided? 
Questions: Pleasure and interest; God; ch ildren and education; many 
different interests; the meaning of demonstrations; of love, truth and order. 
 
 
What is your primary interest, your deep , abiding intention? I think one should 
discover that for oneself. You must find th at out and relate it to all the activities 
of daily life. 
One may be deeply concerned with the world as it is, with the violence, the 
appalling chaos, the political divisions, a nd the corruption—which is death, not 
only outwardly but also inwardly. In discov ering one’s deep interest for oneself, 
one will be able to find out  one’s relationship with a nother, according to that 
interest. If that interest is vague, s uperficial, depending on surroundings and the 
wind that blows in any direction, then our activities, both outwardly and 
inwardly, will be rather casual, without any significanc e. During these talks and 
discussions, could you find out what is  your major interest, whether you are 
really concerned with the world and yo ur place in the world, with your 
relationship to anot her human being, your relations hips politically, economically, 
socially and religiously? What is your deep, major interest in life? Is it acquiring 
money, prestige, security? Please listen to th is carefully. If that is  your real, vital, 
sustained interest, then you must see the c onsequences of such an interest. Or is 
your interest, considering the world and your relationship with it, not only to 
change yourself but also to change the wo rld about you? Then you must also see 
the implications of this. Or  is it that you want to es tablish a personal relationship 
with another so completely , so wholly, that there is no conflict: then also you 
must realize the consequences of this. Pe rhaps your interest is something more 
difficult: trying to find out what is the plac e of thought, as the measurable and the 
immeasurable. To discover in which dir ection our interest lies, we must be 
willing to dedicate ourselves completely to it, and not just play with it, casually 
accepting or rejecting it according to circ umstances, accordi ng to environmental 
influences and our own likes and dislikes . If we are prepared to go into this 
completely, then we can establish a relationship between ourselves—a 
relationship with the world, with our neighbour and with our intimate friend. 
That is what we intend to do during th ese weeks, to find out where our major 
capacity and interest lies, and whether that interest is isolated, or is related to all human beings. If it is isolated and you are seeking your own particular 
enjoyment, your own particular salvati on, your own particular safety, a good position in the world, then in talking this over together , we shall be able to find 
out whether such an interest has any va lidity, whether it has any significance at 
all. But your interest, your  deep purpose may be to fi nd out how to live a totally 
different life. Seeing things as they are, the violence, the brutality, the enmity and 
hatred, the corruption and the utter chaos, your aim may be to find out whether 
the human mind, your mind, the mind of eac h one of us, is capable of completely 
changing, so that, as a human being, yo u not only bring about a radical revolution 
in yourself but also outwardly—although  the outward revolution and the inward 
revolution are not separate. 
We are not talking of phys ical revolution: violence , bombs, killing people in 
the name of peace. That is no revolution at  all; it is merely childish destruction. 
I do not know if you have observed th e violence all over the world. The 
younger generation were at fi rst giving flowers to ever ybody, living in  a world of 
“beauty” and imagination; when that di d not work, they took to drugs, they 
became violent, and we are now living in  a world of complete  violence. You can 
see this in India, in the Middle East, in America. 
As we grow older our capacities are du lled, the world is too much for us. 
Therefore, it behoves each one of us to find out our purpose, our intention, our 
major interest. Once we have discovered this  we can discuss it, then we can take 
a journey together, providing that your interest and the speaker’s are the same, 
because the speaker k nows exactly his intention, his drive, his interest, and if 
your interest is something quite different, then our relationship becomes difficult. 
If, however, your interest is to understand this world in which we live as human 
beings—not as technicians—then we can establish a relationship and together we 
can talk things over—togeth er we can take a journey.  Otherwise these talks and 
discussions will have very little meaning. 
Please bear this in mind,  although you are here for a holiday amongst the 
mountains, the hills and the streams, and the tourist entertainments, in spite of all that, we have an opportun ity of sitting together for a whole hour. You know, that 
is quite interesting, to sit together for an hour and talk over our problems without 
any pretence, without any hypocrisy, a nd without assuming some ridiculous 
façade. To have a whole hour together is really extraordinary,  because so rarely 
do we sit and discuss serious matters with anybody for a wh ole hour. You may 
go to the office for a whole day, but it has far greater meaning to spend sixty 
minutes or more together in order to i nvestigate, to seriously examine our human 
problems hesitantly, tentatively and with  great affection, without trying to 
impose one opinion u pon another; because we are not dealing with opinions, 
ideas, or theories. 
We are concerned with establishing a relationship between one another, and 
that can only be done if we know our mutual interests, and how deep those 
interests lie, and what energy we have to resolve the major problems of our life. Our life is not different from the rest of th e world: we are the world. I don’t think 
any of us realize, deeply and continuously, that we ar e the world and the world is 
us. This must be deeply rooted within us. We have made this so cial structure, this 
violence, according to our desires, according to our ambition, greed and envy, and if we would change soci ety we must first change ourselves; that seems such a simple, radical approach to the whole problem. But we think that by changing 
the outer structure of society, by throwing bombs, making political divisions and 
the like, we shall by some miracle all be come perfect human beings; I am afraid 
that never works. And to realize that we are the world, not as  a verbal statement 
or a theory, but to actually feel it in our hearts, is very difficult, because our 
education, our culture, has laid emphasis on our being separate  from the world; 
that as individuals we have a responsibility to ourselves and not to the rest of the 
world, that as individuals we are free to do as we like, within  reason. But we are 
not individuals at all; we are the result of the culture in which we live. An 
individual means an entity who is not fragm ented, who is whole; we are not that. 
We are broken up, fragmented, in a stat e of contradiction within ourselves, 
therefore we are not individuals. So, seeing all this, what is our major interest in 
life? 
You must give yourself time to think it over. Let us sit together quietly and 
find out. Is it that you have so many pr oblems, economic, social, the problem of 
personal relationship and you would li ke to solve them all wholly and 
completely? Is it that you have sexual prob lems which you have not been able to 
solve, so the solving of that becomes your  major interest? Is it that you want to 
live peacefully in a wo rld that is noisy, corrupt and violent? Or does your interest 
lie in the direction of social reform and to that you are dedicated? And if you are, 
then what is your relationship to that soci ety? Or are you interested in finding out 
the limitations of thought? Thought is limited, however logical, however capable it may be; thought is also inventive a nd experimental, producing marvellous 
things technologically, but it is still limited.  Do you want to find out if there is 
something more, someth ing beyond thought—the measurable and the 
immeasurable? You have to look at all these problems. 
 
Questioner: I don’t understand what y ou mean when you say, “We are the 
world” and “The world is us”. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is that your major problem? Don’t bother about what I say. 
What is your  problem, what is your  major interest, and ha ve you the energy, the 
capacity, the intensity, to solv e that problem? It is really very important for you 
to find out. Don’t concern yourself with what the speaker says; that is irrelevant. 
But find out for yourself what your intere st is and see how much energy, passion 
and vitality you are prepared to give pursuing that in terest; because if you have 
no passion, no intensity to pursue th at interest then—if I may point out—
corruption has set in and where ther e is corruption, there is death. 
Then from which end shall we begin? Can this total movement of living, this 
whole human existence be split up in this  way? Don’t agree or disagree, just 
listen. Do you first of all es tablish a physical relationshi p of order, giving social 
and economic security, and after laying the foundations, build  a complete house 
and then move from there to the other, or is it one total unitary movement, 
indivisible, non-fragm ented, wherever you begin, because the two are related, the 
two are inseparable. We want complete physical order, a nd we must have order in our life 
inwardly as well as outwardly. We must  have order, not military order, not the 
order of the older generation nor the order of the younger generation—the 
permissive society is disorder, it is corru ption and decay; and the so-called order 
of the older people is really disorder, w ith its wars, its violence, its division and 
snobbery—it is also corrup tion. So, seeing both the perm issive disorder of the 
young and the “ordered” diso rder of the old, observing both, one realizes that 
there must be a different kind of orde r. And that order must  assure physical 
security for everybody, not just for a few rich people, or for those who are well 
placed and have capacity. There must be  physical secur ity for everybody. 
As you know, over six milli on people from the East ha ve crossed the border 
into India. Do you realize what that means, not only fo r the refugees but also for 
the country that itself is already impo verished? How can you establish order 
there? And the young people have created total di sorder with the so-called 
permissive society. They sa y the older generation have created disorder and they 
want to have nothing to do with it; they want a different  way of living, so they do 
just as they like. But that too is disorder; both are di sorder. I wish you could see 
this! 
One realizes that there must be physic al order, physical security, for every 
human being in the world. This has always  been the dream of the revolutionaries, 
of the idealists and the philosophers;  they believed that through physical 
revolution they could achieve their amb ition. But it has never succeeded. There 
have been so many revol utions and it has never happened. Look at the 
Communists with their divisions, their armi es and the totalitarian state, and look 
at all the horrors that go on  in the rest of the world; there is no order anywhere. 
One realizes that there must be physic al order. Now does that order depend on 
the administration of the law,  on the authority of societ y according to its culture 
and environment? Or does it depend entirely on the human being, on each one of 
us, the way we live, the way we think, th e way we act in our relationships with 
one another? So, let’s begin there. Th at is, living as a human being in a 
destructive, chaotic, violent world, ho w am I, or how are you, going to bring 
about order? Does that orde r depend on you or on the politician? Does that order 
depend on you, or on the pr iest, or on the philosopher, or on an utopian ideal? 
If you depend on the priest, on the politicia n, on a theory, on a belief, or on an 
ideal, see what takes place! You are then  conforming to a pattern set by the 
politician, by the theorist, by an utopian ideal; hence there is a conflict between 
what you are and what you think should be. And that conflict is part of this 
violence, this disorder. So can you percei ve that order in society can be brought 
about only by you and by nobody else? We are responsib le for that order by our 
conduct, by our thoughts, by our way of life—the whole of it. And is that your 
real, deep, abiding interest, to discover what that order is? One must live when 
the world is in confusion and chaos, w ith its suffering and destruction—and to 
understand this confusion,  one must live in total, complete order. If you are 
interested, if you are prepared to give y our energy, your capac ity, your passion to 
finding out what that order is , then we can go in to it, then we can share this thing 
together; you won’t be just an outsider looking in, because it’s your problem and you must put your teeth into it! If that is your real, deep interest, then you must 
be passionate. I’m not talking about lu st, about physical passion or sexual 
passion. I’m talking of that passion whic h comes when there is deep interest. 
Say, for instance, one is deeply interested in finding out if  sorrow can ever 
end (deeply interested, not superficially because it brings a reward, but because 
you really want to find out)—sorrow, the grief, the pain, the anxiety, the fear, 
which we all feel. If that so rrow can ever come to an e nd, then you will find that 
only then comes real passion, real intens ity. So, is it your intention to discover 
for yourselves whether, living in this world, whether it is possible to bring about 
such order within yourselves?—because yo u are the world, and the world is you. 
 
Questioner: You said you must have passion,  but earlier on you stated that as we 
grow older our passion is dulle d: so what are we to do? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do our passions become dull as we grow older? Perhaps our 
physical passions do, because our glands are not working so efficiently, but we are not talking about the passion of the you ng or of the old and the dissipation of 
that passion. We are talking about having an interest, a vita l interest, a major 
issue with which you, as a human being, are concerned—not a gift, a technique, a 
capacity. If you have such a de ep interest and you live w ith it, then out of that 
comes passion. And that passion doesn’t  disappear just because you have grey 
hair. 
 
Questioner: What happens wh en you have this deep interest, but also you have 
the desire for pleasure? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You have pleasure on the one hand  and a vital, ab iding interest 
on the other. Please just listen to it! Is there a contradiction between pleasure and 
a vital interest? If I am vitally interested  in bringing about order within myself 
and in the world around me, then that becomes my most profound pleasure. I 
may have a nice car, I may look at a girl, or at the hills and all the rest of it; but they are all passing, trivial things wh ich will in no way contradict my vital 
interest which is my pleasure. You see, we  divide pleasure in ourselves; we say it 
would be nice to have a lovely car or lis ten to beautiful music. There is great 
delight in listening to music; it may quiete n and pacify your ne rves by its rhythm 
and quality of sound; it may carry you away to  distant places, far away, and in 
that there is great pleasure. But that pleasure does not detract from your vital interest; on the contrary. When you have a tremendous  interest in something, 
then that very interest becomes the major pleasure in  your life; and all other 
pleasures become secondary and trivial; in  that there is no contradiction. But 
when we are not sure of our major interest in life, then  we are pulled in different 
directions by various pleasures and objects; and then there is a contradiction. 
So one has to find out,  and I hope you will fi nd out during these coming 
weeks, what is your major interest in which passion and pleasure exist. 
 Questioner: Do you not think that this or der can only come about by giving to 
God the place he should hold in our lives? All the chaos that exists in the world 
today is because we live w ithout the idea  of God? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : To bring about this or der in our lives, should we give first place 
to God? If we have no knowledge of God, no feeling for God,  no understanding 
of that thing called God, then orde r becomes mechanical, superficial, and 
changeable. God is th e most important thing, the qu estioner says, and then out of 
that will come order. Now, we are trying to  investigate; we ar e not going to deny 
or to assert; we are trying to find out, to  enquire. Our main di fficulty is that we 
all interpret, or imagine what God is, ac cording to our own culture, according to 
our own background, our fears, our pleasur es, our sense of security and so on. 
Surely that is obvious. And if we d on’t know this ultimate reality and have no 
knowledge of it, can that bring about order?  We are enquiring, trying to find out. 
Or must you have physical order first, which is meas urable, and then having 
established that order, find out the imme asurable, in which order is something 
entirely different? 
This has been the point of view of a ll the religious peop le throughout the 
world: concern yourselves with God and then you will have perfect order. And 
each religion, each sect, translates what God is according to its own beliefs and, 
brought up in that belief, we accept that in terpretation. But if you really want to 
find out if there is such a thing as God, something that cannot possibly be put 
into words, someth ing which is unnameable, if that really is the major interest in 
your life, then that very interest does br ing about order. To find that reality, one 
must live differently: there must be austerity without harshness; there must be 
love. And love cannot exist if there is fear, or the mind is pursuing pleasure. So, 
to find that reality one must understand on eself, the structure and the nature of 
the self; and the structure and the nature of oneself is measurable by thought. It is 
measurable in the sense that thought can  perceive its own activities, thought can 
see what it has created, what it has deni ed, what it has accepted; and when one 
realizes the limitations of thought, then perhaps one can go into that which lies 
beyond thought. 
 
Questioner: The problem of the parent  is what to teach our children. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : First of all, what is our rela tionship with our children? Please 
bear in mind that we are investigating together. If you are th e father, you go to 
the office and come home late in the evening. If you are the mother, you have 
your own ambitions and drives, your own loneliness and miseries, your own 
worries about being loved or not being loved; the childre n have to be looked after 
and there is the cooking and the washing- up; and if there is not enough money, 
you also probably go off to earn a living.  Then what is your  relationship with 
your children? Have you any relationship? 
We are investigating, we are enquiri ng. I am not saying you don’t have any 
relationship. Then, as they grow up you hand them over to a school where they are taught how to read and write; there they form gangs with other children who are also imitating and conforming and who are equally lost. You have the 
problem not only of your own children but also of other children who are 
bullying gangsters. Then what  is your relationship with your child? You have 
children and you want to educate them right ly. Now, if that is really your deep, 
vital interest, you have to find out what is  the meaning of education. Is it merely 
for children to acquire a particular kind of technological knowle dge, so that they 
can earn a livelihood in a world that is becoming more and more competitive, 
because there are more and more people  and therefore less and less jobs? You 
must face all this. 
The world is divided by nationalities, with their sovereign governments, their 
armies and their navies, and all the butch ery that goes with them. And if you are 
only concerned with the development of technological knowle dge, then see the 
consequences of all that; the mind beco mes more and more mechanical and you 
neglect the whole field of life. When the ch ildren grow up, if they are lucky they 
are sent to a university, wh ere they are shaped more a nd more, forced to conform 
and put in a cage. Is that your interest? Is that your  responsibility? And because 
they don’t want to be put into a cage, th ey are in revolt. Plea se, see all this. And 
when that revolt proves to be in effective, there is violence. 
How are you, as a parent, going to edu cate your children to be different? Can 
you form a new kind of educ ational system, or can you, with the help of others, 
start a school which will be totally different? To do that you must have money 
and a group of people who ar e really dedicated. If you are a parent, is it not your 
responsibility to see that such schools are created? So you must work for it; you 
know, life isn’t a plaything. Now, is this your deep, vital interest or, as a parent, 
are you only concerned with your own am bitions, greed, envy, with your position 
at the office, getting higher pay, a larger house, a bigger car and so on? You have 
to look at all this. Therefore, where does education begin? Does it start at school 
or with you? That means, are you, as a parent, as a human being, re-educating 
yourself all the time? 
 
Questioner: Is there any mean ing in education, or will our children finish up just 
like us? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I was told that Socrates complained about the youth of his day. 
He said that they had no manners and no respect for their elders, that they were 
becoming permissive, and all the rest of it; and that was in Athens in the fourth 
century B.C. And we are still complaining about our children. So we are asking: 
does the education of childre n consist in training them  to be like us, like other 
monkeys, or should education include not only technological instruction but also 
a deep understanding of the whole neglecte d field of life? The whole of life, not 
just one fragment of it, because the way we live we neglect all that, we are concerned only with one fragment; therefor e there is chaos and violence in the 
world. 
 Questioner: Are you saying that we sh ould only have one main interest? Should 
we not be interested in ma ny things, in war, in pollu tion, and so on? Surely you 
have to be aware of thes e things, haven’t you? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, when there is a major interest in your life, then you are 
aware of everything. When you are intere sted in order, it is not only order in 
yourself but order in the world. You do n’t want wars; you feel for those people 
because they have no orde r. You know what is happening, therefore, you are 
very concerned with pollution, poverty and war. 
Wars are created by nationalities, by governments, by politic ians, by dividing 
religion into sects and all the rest of it. In observing all that, I want order, not 
only order in myself, but in the world. An d in wanting order, I have to find order 
in everything around me, which means I mu st work for order, be dedicated to 
order, be passionate about order. That means I have no nationality, do you 
follow, Sir? Disorder is vi olence, therefore I must find  out how to en d completely 
all violence within myself. 
 
Questioner: Do you belie ve in demonstrations? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You go up and down the str eet with a group of people 
demonstrating against the war in Vietnam. Do you want to end the war in 
Vietnam or do you want to end all wars? Can you demonstrate to end all wars or 
can you only demonstrate to end a particular  war? Do think about  this, give your 
heart to it. I can demonstr ate against a particular war, but when I am concerned 
with the ending of all wars, not only  outwardly but in myself, how can I 
demonstrate with a group of people? Do you also want to end all wars as I do? 
Do you understand? It means no nationality, no frontiers, no linguistic 
differences, no religious divisions—all th at. No, Sir, you can’t demonstrate, you 
have to live it. And when you live it, that in itself is a demonstration. 
 
Questioner: Do not love and truth bring about order? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But do you know what love is, Sir? Do you know what truth is? 
Can you love if you are jealous, greedy, ambitious? And is truth something fixed, 
static, or is it living, vital, moving, wit hout any path to it? You have to find all 
this out for yourself. 
 
SAANEN  
18 JULY 1971 2 
 
 
ORDER  
 
 
The mind only knows disorder. The state of “not-knowing”. The 
“self” is part of the culture, which is disorder. 
Questions: Is the mind capable of look ing? Analysis; the guru: 
relationship with Krishnamurti; can you look at yourself? 
 
 
We were talking about order. In a world th at is so utterly confused and divided, 
in a world that is so viol ent and brutal, one would ha ve thought that our main 
interest in life would be to bring about this order, no t only in ourselves but also 
outwardly. 
Order is not habit; habit becomes automatic and loses all its vitality when 
human beings merely become orderly in th e mechanical sense. Order, as we were 
saying, covers not only our own particul ar life but also all the life about us, 
outwardly, in the worl d, and deeply inwardly. Now, being aware of this disorder, 
this confusion, how is one to bring about order in on eself without any conflict 
and without it becoming merely habitual, a routine, mechanical and neurotic? 
One has observed those people who are very orderly; they have a certain rigidity, 
they have no pliability; th ey are not quick and have become rather hard, self-
centred, because they are follo wing a particular pattern wh ich they consider to be 
order; and gradually that becomes a neuro tic state. So being aware that this kind 
of order (which is disorder) becomes mechanical and leads to neurosis, nevertheless one realizes that one must ha ve order in one’s life. Then how is this 
to come about? That is what we are going  to consider together this morning. 
One must have physical order. It is essential to have a well-disciplined, 
sensitive, alert body, because that reacts on the mind. And how is one to have a 
highly sensitive organism that doesn’t become rigid, hard , forced into a particular 
pattern or design?—which the mind thinks is orderly and so forces the body to 
conform to. This is one of the problems. 
Then there must be order in the whole totality of th e mind, of the brain. The 
mind is the capacity to under stand, the ability  to observe logi cally, sanely, to 
function totally, all round, not fragmentar ily, not to be caught  in contradictory 
desires, purposes and intentio ns. How is this whole quality  of mind to have total 
order, psychosomatic order without conformity, without the enforcement of a 
thought-up discipline? 
See our difficulty first, what  is involved in all this. One has to have order; this 
is absolutely essential. We  are going to investigate together what we mean by 
that order. There is the order of the older generation, which is really total 
disorder as one observes its activities throughout the world, in business, in religion, in the economic field, amongst nations and everywhere else; there is 
total disorder. 
In reaction to that there is the permissive society, the younger generation, 
who do quite the opposite to the older generation, whic h is also disorder—isn’t 
it? A reaction is disorder. And how is the mind, with all its s ubtleties of thought, 
with all the images though t has built, the images that  it has built about another, 
and the images about itself, the images of  the “what is” and the “what should be” 
(therefore living in a state of contradiction), how is such a mind to have 
complete, total order within itself, so that there is no fragmentation, no reaction to a pattern and no contradiction of the opposites out of which arises violence? 
Now, seeing all this, how is the mind, your mind, to have complete, total order in 
action and in thought, in every mo vement both psychologically and 
physiologically? 
The religious people have said that yo u can only have orde r through belief in 
a higher life, through belief in God, belie f in something outside, and that you 
must conform, adjust, imitate according to that belief; that th rough discipline you 
must force your whole nature and change the structure of the psyche, as well as your physiological state. They have sa id all this. And there is a group of 
behaviourists who say that environment forces you to behave; if you don’t 
behave properly then it dest roys you. And people live th at way, according to their 
own particular belief, whether it be the Communist belief, some religious belief or a sociological, economic belief. 
In spite of this division in the world, the contradiction in ourselves as well as 
in society, and the counter culture agains t the existing culture, they all say that 
there must be order in the world; the military say it and so do the priests. And is 
order mechanical? Can order be brought about through discipline? Can order be 
brought about through conformity, imitatio n and control? Or, is there an order 
that has nothing whatever to do with control, with disc ipline as we know it, that 
has nothing whatever to do with conformity, with adjustment and so on? 
Let us look at this whole idea of c ontrol and find out whether it does bring 
order (which doesn’t mean we are talk ing against control). We are trying to 
understand; and if we understand, we may discove r something entirely different. 
I hope you are following all this and that  you are as interested in it and as 
passionate about it as I am. It is utterl y useless to listen casually to some 
theoretical idea; we are not discussing th eories or hypotheses; we are observing 
actually what is going on, seeing what is  false. The very perception of seeing 
what is false is the tr uth. Do you understand? 
Now what is implied in control? All our culture, all our education and the 
upbringing of our children is based on that; and in ourselves there is this urge to 
control. Now what is implied in that? We have never asked ourselves why we 
should control at all? Now,  let us go into this questio n. Control implies, does it 
not, a controller and the thing to be contro lled. Please give your attention to this. 
I am angry and I must control my anger;  and where there is control, there is 
conflict; “I must” and “I must not”. A nd conflict obviously distorts the mind. A 
mind is healthy when it has no conflict at all; then it can function without any 
friction and such a mind is a sane, clear mi nd, but control denies that, because in control there is conflict and contradiction,  there is the desire to imitate and to 
conform to a pattern—the thing you thin k you ought to do. Is this clear? 
So control is not order. This is very important to understand. One can never 
have order through control, because order implies functioning clearly, seeing 
wholly, without any distortion; but where there is conflict, there must be 
distortion. Control also implies suppre ssion, conformity, adjustment and the 
division between the observer and the obse rved. We are going to find out what it 
is to act or bring about order without co ntrol. Not that we are denying the whole 
structure of control, but we are seeing the falseness of it and, therefore, out of 
that comes the truth of order. Are we following each other, not verbally but 
actually doing it as we go along, because we are trying to create an entirely different world, a different culture, to  bring about a human  being who lives 
without friction? It is only such a mi nd which is capable of living without 
distortion that knows what lo ve is. And control in any form does breed distortion, 
conflict and an unhealthy mind. 
The old culture has said th at you must discipline, and this discipline begins 
with children at home, then  in schools and colleges and right the way through 
life. Now that word “discipline” means to learn; it does not mean drilling, conforming, suppressing and so on. And a mind that is learning all the time, is 
actually in a state of order, but the mind th at is not learning, which says “I have 
learnt”, such a mind brings disorde r. The mind itself resists being drilled, 
becoming mechanical, conforming and suppressing, which is all implied by 
discipline. And yet we said there must be  order. How is this order to come into 
being without discipline in the accepted sense of that word? 
Seeing the problem, which is very co mplex, what is your answer? If you are 
exercising your mind, if you are really deeply  interested in this question of order, 
not only inwardly in yourself but also outwardly, what is your response to it? 
How do you find an answer to this ur ge for order, which does not depend on 
control, on discipline, on conformity an d that totally denies  all authority—which 
is freedom, isn’t it? If there is any form of authority, then in  the acceptance of 
that authority there is conformity, there is a following ; and that breeds 
contradiction and therefore disorder. 
So, no control, in the usual meaning of  that word “discipline”, and a total 
denial of the whole structure and natu re of authority, which negates freedom. 
And yet there must be order; see the complic ations of it. There is the authority of 
law, of the policeman, the civil authority that one must  abide by; but there must 
be freedom from the authority of the elders  with their beliefs, and the authority of 
one’s own demands, experience, knowledg e; because all that denies freedom. 
Seeing the actual state of the world as it is, observing our culture, social, 
economic and religious, our educational sy stem and the family relationship, we 
see that they are all based on this aut hority. And it has caused utter confusion, 
great suffering, wars and the fragmentation of the world, as well as the division 
of man. Observing this, how is one to bring about order? That is your problem—
you understand? How will you answer that  question if you ar e really deeply, 
passionately, interested in trying to bring order to your life, as  well as outwardly? 
What will your answer be? Will you turn to books, to th e priests, to the philosophers, to the gurus, to the latest pe rson who says, “I am enlightened, come 
and I’ll tell you all about it?” To whom  will you turn—to find out how to live a 
life that is totally orderly, denying all conformity, all authority, all discipline and 
control? You have to answer  this question. We are coming to the problem afresh, 
that is, afresh in the sense that we don ’t know how to brin g order out of this 
chaos. If you say, order should be this or  that, then you are reacting to “what is”, 
you are stating something which is in oppos ition to “what is”, a reaction that has 
no validity whatever. So we  are approaching the problem anew; we have so far 
only examined the actual fact of what is going on in the worl d and in ourselves, 
the actual fact. Now, we are going to find out t ogether what order is. You are not 
accepting anything the speaker says, be quite sure about this, because if you do, 
then our relationship changes entirely. Bu t if we are examin ing together, being 
totally interested in this i ssue, which is, that realizing the state of confusion in the 
world, and seeing the disorder  in ourselves, in all our lives, how tawdry  they are, 
realizing the actual fact of this, then we  need intensity and passion to discover 
what is order. 
We are going to find out, first of all,  what it means to learn by observing 
“what is” and learning from that. Learning means the active present of that verb to learn, which is a constant movement of learning, not havi ng learnt and then 
applying that knowledge, which is something quite different from learning all the time. Do you see the difference? We are learning together; we are not storing up knowledge and then acting according to that knowledge; in that there is 
contradiction and therefore control, wher eas a mind that is constantly learning 
has no authority, no contradiction, no cont rol, no discipline, bu t the very learning 
itself demands order. Please obs erve yourself. Are you in a state of learning—or 
waiting to be told what or der is? Do watch yourself. If you are waiting to find out 
from another what order is, then you are dependent on that pe rson, or on that 
book, or on that priest, or on that structure and so on. So we are learning 
together. Is that your state of mind, th at you have understood control and all its 
implications, understood the full significan ce of discipline and also you are 
completely aware of what authority entails? If you have understood, then you are 
free; otherwise you cannot learn. Learning  means a mind that is curious, that 
doesn’t know, that is eager to find ou t, interested. Is your mind like that, 
interested? Are you saying I don’t know wh at order is but I am going to find out? 
Are you very curious, passionate and deep ly interested, is your mind like that 
and, therefore, willing to learn, not from another but to learn for yourself by the 
act of observation? Control and authority, which to you mean discipline, prevent 
observation. Do you see this? A mind can  only learn when it is free, when it 
doesn’t know, otherwise you cannot learn. 
So, is your mind free to observe the wo rld and observe your self? You cannot 
observe if you are saying “This is right” a nd “This is wrong”, “I must control”, “I 
must suppress”, “I must obey”, “I must disobey”—you follow?  And, if you are 
saying that I must live a permissive life, th en you are not free to learn; if you are 
conforming, you are not free to learn.  Are you conforming when you have long 
hair? Am I conforming b ecause I put on a shirt and trousers? Please find out. 
Conformity is not merely to a national pattern, to a particular structure of a society or to a belief, but there is confor mity in little things. And such a mind is 
incapable of learning, becau se behind this conformity  there is this enormous 
sense of fear; the young have it as well as the old and that is why they conform. 
If all that is going on, you are not free to learn. 
And there must be order, something living and beautiful, not a mechanical 
thing—the order of the universe, the order that exists in mathematics, the order 
that exists in nature, in the relationshi p between various animals, an order that 
human beings have totally denied, because in ourselves we are in disorder, which 
means that we are fragmentary, contradict ory, frightened and all the rest of it. 
Now, I am asking myself, and you are asking yourself, whether the mind is 
capable of learning, because it doesn’t kn ow what order is. It knows reaction to 
disorder, but the mind  must discover whether it is actually capable of learning 
without reaction and can therefore be free to observe. In ot her words, is your 
mind aware of the problem of control, of discipline, of authority and the constant 
response of reaction—are you aware of that  whole structure? Are you aware of 
all this in yourself as you live from day to  day? Or are you only aware when it is 
pointed out to you? Please see the difference. If you are aware of this whole 
problem of confusion, discipline, contro l and suppression, which is conformity, 
because you have been  observing, living, and watchi ng, then it is your own; the 
other is second-hand. Now which is it? 
For most of us, it is seco nd-hand, because we are s econd-hand people, aren’t 
we? All our knowledge is second-hand, our traditions are second-hand; there 
may perhaps be a few activities that are to tally our own and not of another. So, 
are we aware that it is our own direct perception, and not second-hand knowledge learnt from another? Now, if it is learnt from another, one has to 
discard that totally, hasn’t one? You have to discard all that has been said just 
now by the speaker about the implications of  control, discipline, authority and so 
on; then you become aware th at what has been pointed ou t to you must be totally 
rejected in order to learn. If you have re jected what others, including the speaker, 
have said, then you are actu ally learning, aren’t you? 
Now, let’s find out together what or der means. How do you find out what 
order is when you don’t know anything about it? You can only do this by 
enquiring into the state of th e mind that is trying to fi nd out what order is. I only 
know what disorder is, I am completely familiar with  it, the whole culture of 
disorder in this present so ciety; I know it very well. But I don’t know what order 
is; I can imagine what order is; I can theorize about it, but theories, imagination, 
speculation are not order; therefore I disc ard all that. So, I really don’t know 
what order is. 
My mind knows what disorder is, how it has come into being, through the 
culture and the conditioning of that cultu re and of the human beings; I am aware 
of all that which is total di sorder. Now, I really don’t know what order is, so what 
is the state of the mind that says I do n’t know? What is th e state of your own 
mind that says, “I really don’t know?” Is  that state of mind waiting for an answer, 
waiting to be told, expecting to find order? If it is waiti ng, expecting to be told, 
then it is not the state which we are talk ing about, the state of not knowing. The 
state of “not knowing” is not waiting to be  told, it is not expecting an answer; it is terribly alive, active, but it does no t know; it knows what  i s  d i s o r d e r  a n d  
therefore rejects it completely . When such a mind says, “I do not know”, then it 
is totally free. It has denied  the disorder and because it is  free, it has found order. 
Do you understand this? It is really marvellous if you go into it for yourself. 
I don’t know what order is and I am not waiting for anybody to tell me. And 
because my mind has denied everything th at is disorder, to tally, without holding 
back a thing, has emptied the cupboard co mpletely, it is free; so it is capable of 
learning. And when the mind is totally free, which means non-fragmented, then it 
is in a state of order. Have you understood this? 
Now, is your mind in total order, otherw ise don’t go any further. Nobody, no 
teacher, no guru, no saviour, no philosophe r, can teach you what order is; in 
denying totally all authority , you are free from fear, and therefore you can find 
out what order is. Now, are you aware of  your mind, of yourself, of your life—
not the holiday life sitting here for an hour listening to a talk—but aware of your 
daily life, of your family life, of your relationship with each other? And in that 
life are you aware of the daily routine, the monotony, the boredom of going to 
the office? Are you aware of the quarrels, of the brutalities, of the nagging and 
the violence, of everything which is the re sult of a culture that is total disorder, 
which is your life? You can’t pick and choos e out of that disord er what you think 
is order. Are you aware that your life is disorderly and if you haven’t got the 
interest, the passion, the intensity, the flam e to find order, then  you will pick and 
choose what you think is order out of the disorder. Can you obser ve yourself with 
great honesty, without any se nse of hypocrisy or double -talk, know for yourself 
that your life is disorderly, and can you put all that aside to find out what order 
is? You know, putting aside disorder is not so very difficult; we dramatize it, 
m a k e  m u c h  o f  i t .  B u t  w h e n  y o u  s e e  s o m e thing very dangerous, a precipice, a 
wild animal, or a man with a gun, you avoid it instantly, don’t you? There is no arguing, no hesitation, no temporizing, th ere is immediate action. In the same 
way, when you see the danger of disord er, there is instant action which is the 
total denial of the whole culture whic h has brought about disorder, which is 
yourself. 
 
Questioner: Is not the problem how to look? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We have been asking, “Is one fre e to look?” You don’t want to 
look, do you? Do you really want to look at all the thin gs that you value, that you 
cherish, the beliefs which you think are important and which are surrounded by a 
great deal of confusion? Are you capable of  looking at all that? Come on, Sirs, it 
is not my problem. Are you capable of looking at yourself without any 
distortion? Have you ever looked at your self, without one image looking at a lot 
of other images? 
 
Questioner: Aren’t we conforming to a certain pattern now? You speak for an 
hour and then we ask questi ons. Isn’t that a pattern too? 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Is this a pattern? You can make  anything into a pattern; sitting 
on a chair is a pattern, sitting on the gr ound becomes a patte rn. But is this a 
pattern? If it is, then let us break it up. Y ou see, I am asking a question which is: 
have you ever looked at yourself? I am not  talking about looking at your face in 
the mirror. But do you know wh at it means to look at yourself actually as you 
really are? Does that frighten you? You are frightened because you have an 
image about yourself, haven’ t you? You think: I am better than that, I am more 
noble than that; or how dreadfully ugly, how old I am, how decrepit, how 
diseased, how silly I am. All that prevents you from looking, doesn’t it? I just 
want to see myself as I am. I don’t want to pick and choose ou t of what I see; I 
just want to look. Does that take a great deal of courage? My interest, my passion to observe what I actually am makes me look, not my fear of finding out what I 
am. I don’t know if you are meeting th is point I am vitally tremendously 
interested in seeing what I am, whatever  it is—are you? In my relationships, I 
want to see whether I lie or tell the trut h, or whether I am frightened; I want to 
see if I am greedy or ambitious, I want to watch all the subtle movements that 
creep in and out of my life. 
Now, how do I look at myself? Is my mi nd capable of looking at itself? Does 
that mean one thought separating itsel f to look at other thoughts? The one 
thought that has separated itself from the other thought then says: this is right, 
this is wrong, this is good , this is bad, this I shall keep, this I won’t keep, how 
frightened I am, how ugly—you follow? Now, is that looking? When one 
thought separates itself from the other th oughts, is such a thought capable of 
looking? Or can you look at yourself only when there is no fragmentation of 
thought? 
Have you ever looked at yourself—the  way you behave, wh y you behave like 
that, how you walk, how you talk, how you listen? Are you aware of what your 
body is doing, watching your nervous  reactions like the twitching of your 
fingers? Are you aware of yourself, your thoughts, your feelings, of your inner 
motives, your inner drives and urges—are you completely aware of all this, not correcting it, but observing, watching, looking? 
 
Questioner: It is very d ifficult not to analyse. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : When you are analysing, you are not looking. 
 
Questioner: I know. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You don’t know otherwise you w ouldn’t analyse. Look, I want 
to see what is in the cupboard of my mind, what is stored up th ere; I want to read 
all the things it contains be cause the content of the mind is the mind. I want to 
see what I am during the waking hours, walking, talking, making gestures, when 
I am at the office, when I am angry, in the fleeting moments of pleasure and sex, 
and the delight of seeing the hills, the stre ams, the trees, the birds and the clouds. 
But I also want to see myself when I am asleep, be aware of what is going on. Don’t you want to see yourself, awake and asleep? You think you do. Do you know what it means to le arn about yourself? It means hard work, daily 
observation, watching, watchi ng, watching, but not self-centred watching, just 
watching, like you watch a bird, or the m ovement of a cloud; you can’t change 
the movement of the cloud, so just watch in the same way. 
And the next question is: ca n the mind be watchful of what it is doing when it 
is asleep? We haven’t time to go in to that now, perhaps another day. 
 
Questioner: I would like to examine the relationship be tween you and us. You say 
you are not a guru, but you talk and we listen; we as k questions and you answer 
them, so could we look at this relationship? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Are we taking a journey togeth er? Or are you merely following? 
It is for you to tell me, not for me to te ll you. What is it you are doing? Are we 
journeying together or are you being led— which is it? If you ar e being led, if you 
are following, there is no relationship, be cause the speaker says, “Don’t follow.” 
He is neither your authority nor your guru; if you insist on following, if you insist 
on listening in order to learn what he is saying, then there is  no relationship. But 
if you say, “I want to learn,” we ar e taking a journey together into the 
extraordinary world in whic h we live, and that world is “me” and I want to 
penetrate into that “me”, I want to learn;  then we are together, then we have a 
relationship. 
 
Questioner: But is it really together you sit up there and we are down here? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I happen to sit on the platform  because it is more convenient, 
because you can see me and I can see you.  It is of no account whether you are 
sitting up here or down there—we are taki ng a journey together into a world in 
which there is neither height nor depth; it is that world whic h we are trying to 
understand. 
So I come back to my question which is : have you ever looked at yourself? 
Have you ever looked at yourself for a ny length of time, as you look at yourself 
in a mirror when you are sh aving, or brushing your hair, or when you make-up? 
Have you ever spent ten minutes, as you do at a mirror, watching yourself, 
without any choice, without any sense of judgment or evaluation, just watching 
yourself? That is the main issue. 
 
SAANEN  
20 JULY 1971 3 
 
 
CAN WE UNDERSTAND OURSELVES?  
 
 
The problem of self-knowledge is th e problem of looking. To look 
without fragmentation, without the “me”. Analysis, dreams and sleep. 
The problem of the “observer” and of time. “When you look at yourself without the eyes of time, who is there to look?” 
Questions: Are some images necessary? Is evaluation vitiated by our 
state of confusion? Conflict. 
 
 
Most of us live a very superficial life and are content to lead such a life, meeting 
all our problems superficially and there by increasing them, because our problems 
are extraordinarily complex, very subtle and need deep penetration and 
understanding. Most of us like to treat our problems at a superficial level 
according to the old tradition, or we try to adjust ourselv es to a modern tendency, 
so we never resolve totally  and completely any of ou r problems, such as war, 
conflict, violence and so on. We also tend to look only on the surface, not 
knowing how to penetrate d eeply within ourselves; either we observe ourselves 
with a certain disgust, with  a certain foregone conclusion, or we look at ourselves 
hoping to change what we see. 
I think it is important, that we should unders tand ourselves totally, 
completely, because as we said the other day, we are the world and the world is 
us. This is an absolute fact; it is not me rely a verbal statem ent or a theory, but 
something that one fe els deeply, with all the agony of it, the suffering, the pain, 
the brutality, the fragmenta tion, the division of na tionalities and religions. And 
one can never solve any of these problems without really understanding oneself, 
because the world is oneself; and if I understand myself there is a living at a 
totally different dimension. Is it possi ble for each one of us to understand 
ourselves, not only at the su perficial level of our minds,  but also to penetrate the 
deep levels of our being? That is what we are going to talk over together this 
morning; when we say we are going to ta lk it over together, it doesn’t mean that I 
talk and you listen—we are going to share it together. 
How is one to look at oneself? Is it po ssible to look at oneself completely 
without the division of the conscious and the deeper layers of consciousness, of 
which we are perhaps completely unaware? Is it possi ble to observe, see the 
whole movement of the “me”, the self, th e “what I am”, with a non-analytical 
mind, so that in the very observati on itself there is instantly a total 
understanding? That is what we are going to investigate; it is a very important 
problem, to discover whet her one can go beyond onesel f and find reality, to come 
upon something that is not measurable by the mind, to live without any illusion. 
This has been the major ai m of every religion throughout  the world; and in the process of this search to go beyond oneself, they have been caught in various 
myths, the Christian myth, the Hindu myth, the whole cu lture of myths which is 
unnecessary and totally irrelevant. 
Now is it possible to look at ourselves non-analytically and therefore observe 
without the “me” observing? I want to understand myself and I know the “me” is 
very complex; it is a living thing, not something dead; it is a liv ing, vital, moving 
thing, it is not just an accumulation of memories, experiences, and knowledge. It 
is a living thing as society is a living thing,  because we have created it. Now, is it 
possible to look without th e observer looking at the th ing called the observed? If 
there is the observer looking, then he must look through fragmentation, through 
division and where there is division, both  in myself and outwardly, there must be 
conflict. Outwardly, the national conflic ts, the religious conflicts, the economic 
conflicts, and inwardly there is this vast field, not only superficially but a wide 
area about which we know almost nothing. So , if in looking there is this division 
as the “I” and the “not I”, as the observer and the obser ved, as the thinker and the 
thought, as the experiencer and the expe rience, then there must be conflict. 
One asks whether it is possible—I am not saying it is, or it is not; we are 
going to find out for ourselves—to observe oneself without this division. And to find that out, we hope to come to th at state of perception which is without 
division, but not through analysis—when th ere is a division between the analyser 
and the thing analysed. In observing myse lf, there is the actual fact of this 
division. When I observe myself I say, “Thi s is good, This is ba d”, “This is right, 
this is wrong”, “This has value, this ha s no value”, “This has relevancy and that 
has not”. Therefore, when I look at my self, the observer is conditioned by the 
culture in which he has liv ed; so the observer is the memory, the observer is the 
entity that is conditioned—the “me”. According to that conditioned background 
of the “me”, I judge, I eval uate; I observe myself acco rding to that culture, and 
according to my conditioning I hope to bring about a change in the observed. 
This is what we are doing all the tim e: hoping to change what is observed 
through analysis, through control, through reformation and so on. That is a fact. 
And I want to find out why this divisi on exists, so I begi n to analyse to 
discover the cause. The analysis is not only  to find the cause, but one also hopes 
to go beyond it. I am angry, greedy, envious, brutal, violent, neurotic, or 
whatever it is, and I begin to analyse the cause of this neurotic state. 
Analysis is part of our culture becau se we have been trained from childhood 
to analyse, hoping that in  this way we shall solve a ll our problems. Volumes have 
been written on it; the psychologists hope  to find the cause of neurosis, 
understand it and go beyond. 
Now what is involved in analysis? It implies time, doesn’t it? I need a great 
deal of time to analyse myself. I must very carefully examine every reaction, 
every incident, every thought and trace it to its source; all that takes time. 
Meanwhile other incidents are going on, ot her happenings, other reactions, which 
I am incapable of immediately understa nding. That is one point: it takes time. 
And analysis also implies that everything  that is analysed must be final and 
complete, and if it is not (which it can’t be), then that finding  is incorrect, and 
with this faulty analysis I proceed to  examine the next ex perience, the next incident, the next bit of the puzzle. So , all the time I am working from a false 
premise, consequently my judgments and evaluations are wrong and I am 
increasing the margin of erro r. Analysis, by its very na ture, implies an analyser 
and the person or thing analysed, whethe r the analyser is the analyst, the 
psychologist, or you yourself; and the anal yser in his examination nourishes and 
sustains the division, and therefore incr eases the conflict. An alysis implies all 
these things: time, evaluation of ever y experience and of every thought 
completely (which is not possible), and the division between the observer and the 
observed that increases conflict. 
Now I can analyse my surface mind, its superficial daily activity, but how am 
I to understand, to investigate the much deeper layers, because I want to understand myself totally, right through? I don’t want to leave any corner or dark 
spot unexamined; I want to analyse everything, so that nothing remains which the 
mind has not completely understood. If th ere is a corner that has not been 
examined, then that corner distorts all th ought, all action. But analysis implies the 
postponement of action. Wh en I am analysing myself, I am not acting; I am 
waiting until my analysis is over, then perhaps I shall act rightly; therefore 
analysis is the denial of action. Action means now, not tomorrow. Seeing all this, how can the mind understand its deep, hidden layers completely? All this is 
implied in understanding myself. 
Can understanding come through dreams? That is, is it possible during sleep 
for dreams to reveal the deep layers of  the unconscious, or the thing that is 
hidden? The specialists say that you mu st dream and that if you do not, it 
indicates a certain kind of  neurosis. They also say that dreams help you to 
understand all the activities of the hidden  mind. So one must enquire into the 
meaning of dreams and whethe r we should dream at all. Or are dreams merely in 
a symbolic form the con tinuation of our daily life? 
During the day the mind is occupied wi th all the trivialities of daily life—
office work, domesticity, the quarrels and the irritations  of relationship, image 
fighting image, and so on. Then, just befo re you go to sleep, there is a taking 
stock of everything that has happened thr oughout the day. Doesn’ t this happen to 
you just before you fall asleep? You reliv e everything: “You should have done 
this, you ought to ha ve said that or said it diffe rently”; you go over the whole 
period of the day, all your thoughts, all your activities, ho w you were angry, 
jealous and all the rest of it. 
Now, why does the mind do this? Wh y does it take stock of the day’s 
happenings and events? Is it not because the mind wants to establish order? The 
mind goes over the day’s activities because  it wants to bring everything into 
order; otherwise when you fall asleep, the brain goes on working and tries to 
bring order in itself, because the brain can only function nor mally, healthily, in 
complete order. So if there is no order duri ng the day, the brain tries to establish 
order while the body is quiet, is asleep, and the estab lishment of that order is part 
of the dreams. Do you accept a ll that the speaker is saying? 
 
Audience: No. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : No? I am delighted. (Laughter. ) Don’t agree or disagree. Find 
out for yourself, not according to some  philosopher, to some analyst, or 
psychologist, but find out for yourself. As lo ng as there is disorder in your daily 
life, the brain must establish order otherwise it cannot function healthily, 
normally and efficiently. And when there is disorder, dreams are necessary to 
bring about order either deep down or at a superficial level. 
Examining all this one asks is it necessa ry to dream at all because it is very 
important not to dream; it is very impor tant to have a mind that is completely 
quiet when you are asleep, then the whol e mind, the whole brain, the whole body 
can rejuvenate itself. But if the brain goes on working, working while you are 
asleep, then it becomes exhausted, therefore neurotic, overstrained and all the 
rest of it. So is it possible not to dream at all? 
I am asking all these questions because I want to understand myself: it is part 
of understanding myself. We are not mere ly investigating dreams, assessing the 
importance or non-importance of dreaming.  Unless there is a deep understanding 
of oneself, all action becomes superficial and contradictory and creates more and more problems. 
The old tradition says that to understa nd myself I must analyse, introspect; 
but I see the falseness of all this. I reject it because it is false although most of the 
psychologists say the opposite. And in obs erving oneself one asks: why does one 
dream at all and is it possible for the whole mind to be comp letely quiet when 
one is asleep? I am not asking this ques tion, you are. I am only suggesting it to 
you; you have to find out. Now, how are you going to find out? 
I realize that when the organism is quiet , completely still, the body is able to 
gather energy and is capable of functio ning more efficiently . When the body has 
no rest, is driven from morning until night  without a pause, it soon wears out, 
breaks down; but if the body can rest fo r ten or twenty minutes during the day, 
then it has more energy. The mind is very active, watching, observing, 
criticizing, evaluating, struggl ing and all the rest of it. And when it goes to sleep, 
the same momentum is kept going. So I am asking myself whether during sleep 
the mind can be absolutely quiet. Just see the beauty of th e question, not the 
answer yet. Unless the body is extrao rdinarily still, with out any movement, 
without any gestures or nervous twitches, and all the things that one does, unless 
it is absolutely quiet (not forced to be quiet) and rela xed, it cannot recuperate, it 
cannot gather energy. 
Therefore I want to find out whether th e mind can be absolutely quiet during 
the night when it is asleep; and I see it ca n only be quiet if every incident, every 
happening during the day is understood in stantly, not carried over. If I carry over 
a problem from one day to the next, the mi nd is continuously engaged; but if the 
mind can solve the problem im mediately, today, then it is finished. Is it possible 
for the mind each day to be  so totally aware that pr oblems no longer exist? By 
the evening, you have a clea r, clean slate. If you do this , not just play with it, 
actually work at it, you will find that when the brain needs re st, it becomes very 
quiet, completely still; even ten minutes rest is enough. And if you pursue this very deeply, you w ill find that dreams become tota lly unnecessary because there 
is nothing to dream about; you are not c oncerned with your future, whether you are going to be a great doctor, a great scie ntist, or a brilliant writer, or whether 
you are going to reach enlightenment the day after tomorrow; you are not 
concerned with the future at all. I am afraid you don’t see the beauty of all this! 
The mind is no longer projecting anything in time. 
Now, having stated all that, can the mind, which is really the observer (not 
only the visual observer, the eyes and so on), can the mind observe without 
division? You understand the question?  Can the mind observe without the 
division between the observer and the observed, because there is only the 
observed, not the observer. 
Let us examine what the observer is. Sure ly the observer is the past, be it the 
past of a few seconds ago, of yesterda y, or of many, many years, living as a 
conditioned entity in a partic ular culture. The observer is the sum total of past 
experiences. The observer is also knowledge. The observe r is within the field of 
time. When he says I will be “that”, he has projected “that” from his past knowledge—whether it be pleasure, pain, suffering, fear, delight and so on—he says I must become that. The past theref ore is going through the present, which is 
modified and which he calls the future, but it is really a projection of the past: so 
the observer is the past. You live in the past, don’t you? Just think of it. You are 
the past, you live in the past and that is your life. Past memories, past delights, 
past remembrances, the things that ga ve you pleasure and displeasure, the 
failures, the disappointments, the lack of  fulfilment and the mi sery, everything is 
in the past. And through the eyes of the observer you judge the present, which is 
living, moving, not a static, dead thing. 
When I look at myself, I am  looking with the eyes of  the past; so I condemn, 
judge, evaluate, “This is right”, “This is wrong”, good or bad according to my 
particular culture and tradition, acco rding to the knowledge and experience 
which I have gathered. Therefore it prev ents observation of the living thing, 
which is the “me”. And that “me” may not  be “me” at all, because I only know 
the “me” as the past. When th e Muslim says that he is a Muslim, he is the past, 
conditioned by the culture in which he has been brought up; it is the same with 
the Catholic or the Communist. 
So when we talk about living, we ar e talking about living in the past; and 
there is conflict between the past and th e present, because I am conditioned. I 
cannot meet the living pr esent unless I break down my conditioning, and my 
conditioning is deliberately brought about  by my parents, my  grandparents, to 
keep me in the narrow line of  their belief, of their traditio n, to continue with their 
mischief and their misery. We are doing th at all the time; we live in the past, not 
only through our conditioning, through the culture in which we  have lived, but 
also through every experience, incident  and happening in our life. I see a 
beautiful sunset and I think how marvellous it is with the light, the shadows, the 
rays of the sun on the distant hills, and it has already been stored up as memory 
and tomorrow I say I must look at that sunset again and see its beauty. Then I 
struggle to find it, and when I can’t, I go to a museum and the whole circus 
begins. 
Now, can I look at myself with eyes that have never been touched by time? 
Time involves analysis, time involves holding on  to the past, tim e involves this whole process of dreaming, recollecting, gathering the past and holding it, all 
that. Can I look at myself without the eyes of time? Pu t that question to yourself. 
Don’t say you can or cannot. You don’t kn ow. And when you look at yourself 
without the eyes of time, what or who is there to look? Don’t answer me, please. 
Do you understand my questio n? I have looked at myself with the quality, the 
nature and the structure of time, the past. I have looked at myself through the 
eyes of the past; I have no other eyes to look. I have looked at myself as a 
Catholic, or something else, which is th e past, so my eyes are incapable of 
looking at “what is” withou t time, which is the past. 
Now I am asking a question, which is: can the eyes observe without the past? 
Let me put it differently. I have an image of myself, created and imposed 
upon me by the culture in which I have lived; I also have my own particular 
image of myself, what I should be and wh at I am not. In fact , we have a great 
many images; I have an image about yo u, about my wife, my children, my 
political leader, my priest, and so on; so I have dozens of imag es. Don’t you have 
them? 
 
Questioner: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now, how can you look withou t an image, because if you look 
with an image, it is obviously a distortion? You were angry wi th me yesterday, 
so I have created an image about you, that  you are no longer my friend, that you 
are ugly and all the rest of it. If I look at you with that im age next time I meet 
you, that image will distort my perception.  That image is of the past, as are all 
my images, and I dare not get rid of an y of those images be cause I don’t know 
what it would be like to lo ok without an image, so I cling to images. The mind 
depends on an image for its survival. I wonder if you are following all this. So 
can the mind observe withou t any image, without the image of the tree, cloud, 
hills, without the image of my wife, my children, my husband? Can the mind be 
without any image in relationship? 
It is the image that brings conflict in relationship. I cannot get on with my 
wife because she has bullied me; that imag e has been built up, day after day, and 
it prevents any kind of relationship; we ma y sleep together but that is irrelevant; 
so there is conflict. Can th e mind look, observe withou t any image what has been 
put together by time? That means, can the mind observe without any image? Can 
it observe without the observ er, which is the past, which is the “me”? Can I look 
at you without the interference of the conditioned entity, which is the “me”? 
What do you say? “Impossible!” How do you know it is impossible? The 
moment you say it is not possible, then you  have blocked yourse lf and if you say 
it is possible, it is also blocking you; but if you say let’s find out, let’s examine, 
let’s go into it, then you will discover that the mind can observe without the eyes 
of time. And when it so observes, th en what is there to be observed? 
I started out learning about myself; I have explored all the possibilities of 
analysis, and I see that the observer is the past. The observ er is much more 
complex; one can go much deeper into it. I see that the observer is the past, and 
the mind lives in the past because the brain has evolve d through time which is the past. And in the past there is security—m y house, my wife, my  belief, my status, 
my position, my fame, my shoddy little self ; in that there is great safety and 
security. So I am asking if the mind can ob serve without any of that, and if it can, 
what is there to see excep t the hills, the flowers, th e colours, the people—you 
follow? Is there anything in me to be observed? Therefore, the mind is totally 
free. 
You may ask what is the po int of the mind being free. The point is that such a 
mind has no conflict, such a mind is comp letely quiet and peaceful, not violent, 
and it is only this quality  of mind that can create a new culture, not a 
counterculture of the old, something totally different in  which we shall have no 
conflict at all. One has discovered all th is, not as a theory , not as a verbal 
statement, but one has seen  this actual fact within  oneself, that the mind can 
observe totally without the eyes of the past; then the mind is something 
completely new, completely different. 
 
Questioner: I think we all see the danger of these images but surely, at certain times, some images are nece ssary. For instance, if someb ody rushes at you with 
a knife, the image you have will help to  save your life. How can we choose 
between useful and useless images? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We all live with images, the questioner says, and some are 
useful, necessary and protec tive; others are not. The im age of a tiger when you 
are in the jungle is protec tive, but the image that you have abou t your wife, your 
husband, or whatever it is, that image de stroys relationship. The questioner asks, 
how is one to choose between which im ages to keep, and which to discard. 
First of all, why do you choose at all? Listen to my question, please. Why do 
we choose? What is the structure, the na ture of choice? I only choose, don’t I, 
when I am uncertain. When there is uncerta inty, when there is confusion. If there 
is no clarity then I choose, I say that I don’t know what to do, perhaps I will do 
this or that. When you see something very clearly, is there any need to choose? 
Surely, it is only the confused mind that chooses. And we have made choice one 
of the most important things in life. We talk about freedom to  choose, to choose 
this or that, to choose our political party,  our politicians. So I ask myself, why do 
I choose at all? I choose between two colour ed materials, but that is not what we 
are talking about. We are talking ab out choice which is the outcome of 
uncertainty, of confusion, where there is no clarity; then I have to choose, but a 
mind that is very clear has no choice. No w, is your mind confused? (I am coming 
to the question, Sir.) Obviously your mind  is confused, otherwise you wouldn’t 
all be sitting here. And out of that confusion you choose  and increase the 
confusion. 
You have so many images, some are pr otective, others are not necessary. Is 
there any choice? Listen carefully. Is choice  necessary there at all? I have many, 
many images about everything, as well as opinions, judgments and evaluations; the more opinions I have, the more I think my mind is  clear. And from all these 
images I try to decide wh ich are important and relevant and which are not. Now 
why do I have to choose? It is because I am uncertain which images to keep and which to discard. I choose when I do no t know which images to discard. Now 
who is the entity that is choosing? Knowledge, surely, and knowledge is the 
past—the past, which has created all th ese images, chooses which it shall keep 
and which it shall discard. So you are choosing according to the past and 
therefore your choice invariably must be confused; therefore, don’t choose! 
Wait! See it! If you don’t choose, then what happens? You won’t obviously be 
run over by the bus. But it is the very choice, the choosing, that sustains the 
images. 
 
Questioner: You mentioned th at we are all confused otherwise we wouldn’t be 
here. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s partly it, Sir. 
 
Questioner: If I am confused how can I possibly listen to you without evaluating 
everything that you say? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s just it. That’s what we are afraid of. The questioner says 
that if I am confused, which I am, how can I possibly listen to you clearly—
right? But you are not listening, are you? 
 
Questioner: Sometimes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sometimes? We are not talki ng about “sometimes”, we are 
asking: are you listening now?  You know, when you liste n with attention, with 
affection, with care, are you confused? It  is only when you are not listening and 
you want to listen that confusion arises . At the actual moment of listening where 
is the confusion? And wh en you remember the moment when you listened so 
completely, you say to yourself, “I wish to goodness I could be like that again”. 
And this produces conflict. See what ha s happened. When you say: how am I to 
get back to that state of listening, the me mory of that state of listening remains 
and the actual fact has gone, so your memory then says I must listen more 
carefully; so there is a contradiction. Wh ereas if you listen completely, entirely, 
wholly, at the actual moment of listening there is no confusion and that moment 
is enough. Don’t try to get back to it.  Pick it up again ten minutes later, but 
during those ten minutes be aware that you have been inattentive. 
 
Questioner: Will this new culture that  is emerging from the still mind be 
peaceful? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I don’t know, Sir, th at is a supposition. 
 
Questioner: I haven’t finished it... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh! I beg your pardon. Questioner: Well, if... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Not if! 
 
Questioner: If I were peaceful, would I be in conflict w ith the present structure of 
society? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What do we mean by, “In conf lict with the present structure”? 
Go on, investigate, Sir; don’t wait for me to do it. 
 
Questioner: Conflict through competition. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Competition? I want to establish myself, my ideas, my beliefs 
and so on. That is exactly wh at they are doing, isn’t it? 
 
Questioner: If somebody says to you ta ke this gun and shoot somebody, then you 
are in conflict. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : If somebody asks me to take  a gun and shoot somebody, I 
won’t. What is the question? 
 
Questioner: If you say I won’t, then you are in conflict. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Certainly not. 
 
Questioner: They will say you are. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : All right, they put me in prison,  but I am not in conflict with 
them. If the drug culture says you must take  drugs and I say that I won’t, are they 
in conflict, or am I? I am not; they are. What is the point of all this? 
 
Questioner: There are two sides to conflict. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. There are not two sides. I don’t want to have conflict. As a 
human being, I have inves tigated this whole business of conflict, outwardly and 
inwardly, and I have gone into it very th oroughly and let us suppose that I have 
completely eliminated all sense of vi olence within me. Now, if you are in 
conflict, what am I to do? You ask me to take a gun and shoot somebody and 
when I refuse, you get angr y, you become violent, you beat me. That is your 
problem, not my problem. 
 
Questioner: You say he  is in conflict with me, but I am not in conflict with him. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But I am not in conflict. Why should I shoot anybody? Look, 
Sir, you are not offering me a gun—he re, now—are you? Then why does the 
problem arise? You see, the problem ar ises because we are beginning to speculate. “What will you do if you ar e peaceful?” First find out how to live 
peacefully and then ask the question. 
 
Questioner: Does conflict come from imagination? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : When two people quarrel, does it come from imagination? Look 
at the question. I am attached, dependen t on you. I depend on you emotionally, 
psychologically, physically, sexually and economically; I depend on you totally. 
And then one beautiful mo rning you tell me to go, because you like somebody 
else, so there is conflict—right? Is that imagination? It is a fact. And when you 
turn against me I am lost, because I depe nd on you for companionship and for so 
many other things; that is not imag ination; it is an actual fact. 
Then I begin to find out  why I am dependent on you; I want to find out 
because it is part of self-knowledge. Aren’t you all dependent on somebody? 
Psychologically, inwardly? Can you stand completely alone—inwardly, you understand? Outwardly you can’t stand alone because you need the milkman, the postman, the bus driver and so on. But in wardly you can be completely alone, not 
dependent on anybody. So I have to fi nd out why I am inwardly dependent. 
I am lonely and I don’t know how to go beyond this loneliness. I am 
frightened of it deep down and I am incapable of resolving this terrible thing called loneliness. Don’t you know all this ? Therefore not knowing how to resolve 
it, I attach myself to people, to ideas, to groups, to activities, to demonstrations, 
to climbing the mountains and all the rest of it. If only I could resolve totally this problem of loneliness so that it doesn’t ex ist at all. How am I to be beyond this 
loneliness which man has inwardly fought at  all times? He feels lonely, empty, 
insufficient, incomplete and he  says there is God, there is this, there is that; he 
projects an outside agency. How can the mind free itself from this terrible burden 
of what it calls loneliness? Have you ev er realized what horrors we commit out 
of this feeling of loneliness? We will go into this next time. 
 
SAANEN  
22 JULY 1971 4 
 
 
LONELINESS  
 
 
Preoccupation with oneself. Relationship. Action in relationship and 
daily life. Images isolate: the unde rstanding of image-building. “Self-
concern is my major image.” Relationship without conflict means 
love. 
Questions: Can the self have unmotivated passion? Images; drugs and 
stimulants. 
 
 
Most of us realize, when we  dare look at it, that we are terribly lonely, isolated 
human beings. Whether we are consciou sly or unconsciously aware of it, we 
want to escape from it, because we do not know what lies behind and beyond it; 
being frightened, we run away from it through attachment, through activity and 
every form of religious or worldly entertai nment. This is fairly obvious when one 
observes it in oneself. We isolate ourse lves by our everyday activities, by our 
attitude and our way of thin king; although we may have  an intimate relationship 
with somebody, we are always thinking about ourselves. The result of this is 
more isolation, more loneliness, a greate r dependence on outward things, greater 
attachments and the resultant suffering wh ich arises from it. I do not know if you 
are aware of all this. 
Perhaps as we are sitting here, we could become aware of this thing called 
loneliness and of the isolation, dependency  and suffering it brings. This is going 
on in ourselves all the time. If one is observant one can see that our whole 
activity is self-centred. We are thinking  about ourselves endlessly: about our 
health, that we must meditate, that we must change; we want  a better job with 
more money, a better relationship. “I wa nt to attain enlightenment”; “I must 
achieve something in this life”—“me” and “my life”, my worries, my problems. 
This eternal preoccupation with oneself  is going on all the time; we are 
devoted to ourselves. That is an obvious fact. And whether we go to an office or 
to a factory, do social wo rk or are concerned with th e welfare of the world, our 
self-concern motivates all our activities; it is always “me” first. This self 
preoccupation which operates in daily lif e and relationship does bring about 
isolation. This again is fairly obvious,  and if one goes into  it very deeply one 
discovers that this isolation is an awar eness of being comple tely alone, cut off, 
not having a relationship with anybody or anythi ng. You may be amongst a 
crowd, or sitting with a friend, when sudde nly this sense of utter isolation, of 
being completely cut off from everybody comes upon you. I do  not know if you 
have noticed this or if it is somethi ng you have never experienced. When we 
become aware of this loneliness, then we  try to escape by be ing occupied through domestic strife, or various forms of entert ainment, by trying to meditate, and so 
on. 
Surely, all this indicates that the mind, whether it is shallow or deep, 
superficial or merely caught in technolo gical knowledge, must cut itself off from 
every form of relationship if it is consta ntly occupied with itself. Relationship is 
the most important thing in life, because  if you don’t have a right relationship 
with the one, you cannot possibly have it with any other human being. You can 
imagine that you will have a better relati onship with another, bu t it is merely at 
the verbal level and therefore illusory . If you understand that relationship 
between two human beings is the same as relationship with the rest of the world, 
then isolation, loneliness, has quite a different meaning. 
So what is relationship? We are trying  to find out why human beings are so 
desperately lonely. Not having love, but wa nting to be loved th ey cut themselves 
off, physically and psychologically and thereby become neurotic. Most people 
are neurotic, slightly unbalanced, caught in some particular idiosyncracy. It 
seems, if you examine it closely, that all this arises from the utter lack of 
relationship. So before we can understand how to bring an end to this loneliness 
and suffering, to this ache and anxiety of human existence, we must first of all go 
into this question of relationshi p—what it means to be related. 
Are we related at all with another? Th ought asserts that we are related, but 
actually we may not be, even though on e human being may have an intimate, a 
sexual relationship with another. Unless one  deeply understands the truth about 
relationship, it appears that human bei ngs must inevitably end in sorrow, in 
confusion and in conflict. They may acce pt various forms of belief, or do social 
work, but all that has no va lue, unless they have esta blished between themselves 
a relationship in which there is no conflic t whatever. Is that possible? Can you 
and I be related? Perhap s you could have a very good relationship with me, 
because soon I am going away  and then it is finished. Can there be a relationship 
between two human beings if each one is occupied with himself?—if each one is 
concerned with his own am bitions and worries, his op position in the world and 
all the absurdity that  human beings go through? When a human being is caught 
in that net, can he have a ny relationship with another? 
Please, follow all this. Can there be any relationship between a man and a 
woman when one is a Catholic and the othe r is a Protestant, when one is a Hindu 
and the other is a Buddhist? 
What then is relationship? It seems to me that it is one of the most important 
things in life, because living is relationship. If there is no relationship, there is no 
living at all; then life mere ly becomes a series of conflicts, ending in separation 
or in divorce, in loneliness, with all the fears, anxieties, problems of attachment, 
and all the things that are involved in th is sense of being completely isolated. I 
am sure you know all this. One observes how extraordinarily v ital relationship is 
in life, and how very few hum an beings have broken down  the barrier that exists 
between themselves and another. To break down this barrier with all its implications—not just the physical barrier—one has to go deeply into this question of action. What is action? Action is not future or past action, but acting . Is it the result 
of a conclusion and acting according to th at conclusion? Or is it based on some 
belief and acting according to the belief?  Is it based on some experience and 
acting according to that experience or knowle dge? If it is, then ac tion is always in 
the past, our relationship is always in the past, never in the present. 
If I have a relationship with another— and relationship o bviously is action—
throughout the days, weeks or years of th at relationship I have built an image and 
I act according to that image, and the ot her acts according to the image which he 
has; so the relationship is not between us but between these two images. Please 
do observe your own minds, yo ur own activity in relationship, and you will soon 
find out the truth and validity  of this statement. Our relationship is based on 
images, and how can there be a relations hip with another, if it is merely the 
relationship of these images? 
I am concerned with having a relati onship in which there is no conflict 
whatsoever, in which I am not using or exploiting an other, either sexually, for 
reasons of pleasure, or for the sake of companionship. I see very clearly that 
conflict destroys any form of  relationship, so I must re solve that conflict at the 
very centre, not at the periphery. And I can only put an end to conflict by 
understanding action, not  only in relationship but in daily life. I want to find out 
if all my activities are isolating, in the sense that I have built a wall round myself; 
the wall being myself concer ned with myself, with my future, my happiness, my 
health, my God, with my belief, my success, my misery—you fol low? Or is it 
that relationship has nothing whatsoever to  do with me or myself? Myself is the 
centre, and all the activities that are concerned with my happiness, my 
satisfaction, my glory must isolate. Wh ere there is isolation there must be 
attachment and dependency; when there is uncertainty in that attachment and 
dependency then there is suffering, an d suffering implies isolation in any 
relationship. I see all this very clearly, not verbally but actu ally—it is a fact. 
For many years I have built images about  myself and about another; I have 
isolated myself through my activities, through my beliefs  and so on. So my first 
question is—how am I to be free of thes e images?—the images of my God, my 
conditioning, that I must ac hieve fame or enlightenment (which is the same 
thing), that I must achieve success and so I am afraid of being a failure. I have so 
many images about myself and about you.  How am I to be free of them? Can I 
end the building of images  through the analytical process? Obviously not. 
Then what am I to do? It is a problem  and I must end it, not carry it over to 
the next day. If I do not end it today,  then the problem creates disorder, a 
disturbance, and the brain needs orde r to function healthily, normally, not 
neurotically. I must establish order no w, during the day, otherwise the mind 
worries about it, has dreams and is incapab le of being fresh the next morning; so 
I must end this problem. 
How am I to prevent this building of images? By not creating a super-
image—obviously. I have many images and not being able to be free of them the 
mind unfortunately invents a super-image, the higher self, the Atman; or it introduces some outside ag ency, either spiritual or the “Big Brother” of the 
communist world. So without creating a hi gher, nobler image, there must be the ending of all the images wh ich I have created. I see that if I have one single 
image, there is no possibility of any rela tionship, because images separate and 
where there is separation there must be conflict, not only na tionally but between 
human beings; that is clear. Then how am I to be rid of  every image which I have 
gathered, so that the mind is completely  free, fresh and you ng, so that it can 
observe anew the whole movement of life? 
First of all, I must find out non-analytic ally how the images come into being. 
That is, I must learn to observe. Is observation base d on analysis? I observe, I 
see—is that the result of analysis, of prac tice, of time? Or is it an act outside of 
time? Man has always tried to go beyond tim e by various tricks and they have all 
failed. Suspecting that perhap s he is incapable of gettin g rid of these innumerable 
images, he has created a super-image, and to that image he has become a slave, 
therefore he is not free. Whether that super-image is the soul, the higher self, the 
State or anything else, it is still not free dom: it is another image. Therefore I am 
vitally interested in ending  all images, because then on ly is there a possibility of 
having a relationship with anot her; my concern is to find out if it is at all possible 
to end the images instantly , not chase one image after another. That will 
obviously lead nowhere. 
So I must find out if I can break the mechanism of the mind which builds 
images and at the same time go into the question of what it is to be aware; because that may solve my problem, which is the ending of all images. That 
gives freedom, and when there is freedom  then only is th ere a possibility of 
having a true relationship in  which every form of conflict has come to an end. 
What does this awareness mean? It implies an atten tion in which there is no 
choice whatsoever. I can’t ch oose one image instead of th e other, then there is no 
ending of that image. So I must find out what it is to be  aware, in which there is 
no choice at all, but only pure observation, pure seeing. 
Now, what is seeing? How do I look at a tree, or a mountain, at the hills, the 
moon, the flowing waters? There is not onl y visual observation, but also the mind 
has an image about the tree, the cloud and the river. That river has a name; it makes a sound which is pleasa nt or unpleasant. I am al ways observing, am aware 
of things, in terms of like and dislike, in terms of comparison. Is it possible to 
observe, to listen to that river without any choice, any resistance and attachment, 
without any verbalization? Please do this as we are talking—it is your morning 
exercise! 
Can I listen to that river without any sense of the past? Can I observe these 
various images without any choice?—which means without condemning any one of them, or being attached to them, but just observe without any preference. You 
can’t do it, can you? Why not? Is it because my mind has become used to 
prejudices and preferences? Is it because it is lazy and has not sufficient energy? 
Or is it that my mind does not really want  to be free of images and wants to hold 
on to one particular image? So  it means that the mind refuses to see the fact that 
all existence is relationship,  and when there is conflict in that relationship, then 
life becomes a misery and loneliness and confusion fo llow. Does the mind see 
the truth non-verbally, that where there is conflict there is  no relationship? How can one be free of the images that one has? First of all I must find out 
how these images come into being, what is the mechanism that creates them. You 
can see that at the moment of actual rela tionship, that is when you are talking, 
when there are arguments, wh en there are insults and brutality, if you are not 
completely attentive at that moment, th en the mechanism of  building an image 
starts. That is, when the mind is not comple tely attentive at the moment of action, 
then the mechanism of bui lding images is set in  motion. When you say 
something to me which I do not like—or which I like—if at that moment I am 
not completely attentive, then the mechanism starts. If I am attentive, aware, then 
there is no building of images. When th e mind is fully awak e at that actual 
moment, not distracted, not frightened, not  rejecting what is being said, then 
there is no possibility of building an image. Try th is—do it during the day. 
So I have found how to prevent the bu ilding of images; bu t what happens to 
all the images that I have gathered? You are following the problem? Apparently 
this is not your problem, because if it we re the real, deep, vital problem in your 
life, you would have solved it for yourself  instead of sitting here waiting for me 
to find the answer for you. Now, what happens to all the images which you have 
collected? Do you kno w you have many images hidden away in the cupboard of 
your mind? Can you resolve th em all, bit by bit, or w ould that take an infinite 
time? While you are dissolving one image,  you are already creating others, so 
there is no ending to the gra dual process of getting rid of  one image after another. 
So you have discovered a truth, which is, that you cannot get rid of the images 
one by one; therefore the mi nd that really sees the trut h of this is totally aware 
when it is creating an image. In that attention all the other images go away. I 
wonder if you see this. 
Images, then, are formed wh en the mind is not atte ntive; and most of our 
minds are inattentive. Occasionally we give  attention, but for the rest of the time 
we are inattentive. When you are aware of one image attentively, and you are 
also attentively aware of the whole me chanism of the build ing of images and 
how it operates, then in that attention the building of all images  comes to an end; 
whether they be of the past, the present or  of the future. What matters is the state 
of attention, not how many images you ha ve. Do, please, try and understand this, 
because it is most important. If you ca n really grasp this, then you have 
understood completely all th e machinery of the mind. 
Most of us, unfortunately, have not been  able to solve our problems; we don’t 
know how to deal with th em, so we live with them, they become our habit and 
they are like impenetrable armour. If you have a problem which has not been 
resolved, you have no en ergy; the energy that you have is taken up by the 
problem; if you have no ener gy, that too becomes a hab it. So if you are at all 
serious, if you really want to live a lif e in which there is no conflict whatsoever, 
then you have to find out how to end a human problem instantly, immediately; 
which means that you give co mplete attention to the pr oblem and that you are not 
seeking an answer to it. Because if you ar e trying to find an answer, then you are 
looking beyond the problem, whereas if you remain with the problem and are 
completely attentive, then in the problem itself—not beyond it—is the answer. Let me put it differently. We all know what suffering is, both physical and 
psychological, that is inwardly. One can deal with physical pain by various 
remedies and also by not allowing the memory of that pain to remain. If you are 
aware of the pain, and in that very aw areness you see the me mory of the past, 
then the pain disappears; therefore you ha ve energy to meet the next pain, when 
it comes. We all have suffered psychologica lly in various ways, either with great 
intensity or to a lesser degree—we have all had suffering of one kind or another. 
When we suffer, instinctively we want to run away from it— through religion, 
through entertainment, reading books, th rough anything to get away from the 
suffering. 
Now if the mind is attentive and does not move away from suffering at all, 
then you will see that out of total attention comes not only energy—which means 
passion—but also that suffering comes to an end. In the same way, all images 
can end instantly when there is no pref erence for any image; this is very 
important. When you have no preference, you have no prejud ice. Then you are 
attentive, then you can look. In that observation  there is not only the 
understanding of the building of images, but also the ending of all images. 
So I see the importance of relationship, and there can be a relationship 
without any conflict, which means love. Love  is not an image; it is not pleasure; 
it is not desire. Love is not something th at can be cultivated; it is not dependent 
on memory. Can I live a daily life without any kind of self-concern, because the 
self-concern is my major image? Can I live without that major image? Then 
action does not bring loneline ss, isolation and suffering. 
 
Questioner: When one looks within and seems to experience a deep unmotivated 
passion to understand, with a bit of candour one finds that  this feeling is actually 
a wish to experience reality. Can the self, which is all we know, have this unmotivated passion and see the essential difference between these two feelings? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : First of all, what is the self, the “me”? Surely, that “me” is the 
result of our education, of our conflicts, of our culture, of our relationship with 
the rest of the world; that  “me” is the result of the propaganda which we have 
been subjected to for five thousand years. It is that “me” which is attached to our 
furniture, our wives or husband s and so on. It is that “m e” which says “I want to 
be happy. I must be successful, I have achi eved”. It is that “me” which says I am 
a Christian, a communist or a Hindu. Th ere are all those terrible divisions—the 
“me” is all that, isn’t it? 
Can that “me” which is isolated, which by its very structure and nature is 
limited and therefore creates division, can  that “me” have any passion at all? 
Obviously not. It can have  the passion of pleasure, which is something quite 
different from the passion we are talking about. Only with the ending of the “me” 
is there passion; it is only a mind that is free from all prejudices, opinions, 
judgments and all conditioning, that can  have passion, energy and intensity, 
because it is able to see “what is”. You agree and say “Yes”. Is that merely a 
verbal statement, or have you rea lly seen the truth of it and are free? 
 Questioner: Do these images  we have waste our energy? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is obvious, isn’t it? If I have an  image about myself and that is 
in opposition to your image, there must be conflict, therefore it must waste 
energy, isn’t that so? 
 
Questioner: Can a person wh o is free from problems have a relationship with 
someone who is full of problems?  (Laughter. ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Well, you have answered it, haven’t you? If you are really free 
of problems—not just in your imagina tion—but actually free of every problem 
that human beings have, such as sorrow,  fear, death, love and pleasure, can I 
have a relationship with you if I have pr oblems? Obviously I can ’t. Please listen 
to this: you have no problems and I have problems, then what do I do? Either I 
shun you, avoid you, or I begin to worship you. I put you on a pedestal and say, 
“What an extraordinary man you are, because you have  no problems.” I begin to 
listen to whatever you say in the hope  that you will be able to resolve my 
problems. And that means I am going to destroy you with my problems. First I 
pushed you away; now I accept you, worshi p you, which means I will kill you 
with my problems. 
 
Questioner: Is there any hope for us?  (Laughter. ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It all depends on you! If you are really serious, if you are deeply 
interested in resolving your problems completely, then you will have the 
intensity and vitality to resolve them, but it is no use if  you play with them one 
day and the next day forget about them. 
 
Questioner: What can we do to prevent others from taking drugs? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do you take drugs? 
 
Questioner: No, but I drink coffee an d alcohol. Isn’t that the same? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We drink coffee, we take al cohol, we smoke, and some take 
drugs. Why do you take them? Coffee and te a are stimulants, aren’t they? I don’t 
take them myself, but I know about th em. Physiologically you may need some 
form of stimulant; some pe ople do. Are alcohol and tob acco the same as taking 
drugs? Go on, answer it. 
 
Questioner: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You say taking alcohol is the same as taking drugs. 
 
(General disagreement.) 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Don’t take sides, please. One says, “No”, somebody else says 
“Yes”. Then where are we? I am simply asking why you take any of these things 
at all. Do you need a s timulant, do you need some thing to pep you up, to 
encourage you? Please answer this question. Do you need constant stimulation 
and entertainment, must you have tea, t obacco, drugs and all the rest of it? Why 
do you need them? 
 
Questioner: To escape. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : To escape, to take the easy wa y out. You drink a glass of wine 
and you are happy, it is done quickly! 
 
Questioner: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So you need stimulants in  various forms. Are you being 
stimulated now by the speaker? 
 
Questioner: Yes.  (Laughter. ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Please pay a little attention. Yo u say “No” and this gentleman 
says “Yes”. Please investigate. Are you being stimulated at this moment? If you 
are, then the speaker is just as good as a drug. Then you depend on the speaker as 
you are dependent on tea, coffee, alcohol or drugs, whatever it is. I am asking 
why you depend, not whether it is right or  wrong, whether yo u should or should 
not. Why do you depend on any of these stimulants? 
 
Questioner: We can see what action it has on us, but we don’t need to be 
dependent on it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But you are dependent! When the e ffect wears off you need 
more stimulants, which means you are dependent. I may take LSD one morning and get a kick out of it, an d when it lets me down I need some more; the day after 
tomorrow I am dependent on it. Now I am asking why the human mind 
depends—why does it depend on sex, on drugs, on alcohol, on any form of 
outward stimulation? This is psychologi cal, isn’t it? There is a physiological 
need for tea and coffee b ecause we eat wrongly, we live wrongly, because we 
overindulge and so on. But why do we want  to be stimulated psychologically? Is 
it because we are so poor in  ourselves? Is it because we have not the brain, not 
the capacity to be something entirely diffe rent, that we depend on stimulants? 
 
Questioner: Doesn’t alcohol destroy the brain as well as drugs? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Alcohol may do it gradually, it ma y take a number of years, but 
drugs are very dangerous because they a ffect future generations, your children. 
So if you say, “I don’t care what happens  to my grandson, I am going to take 
drugs”, then that is the end of the argument. But I am asking: what happens to your mind when you depend on anything , whatever it is, whether it’s tea, coffee, 
sex, drugs or nationalism? 
 
Questioner: I lose my freedom. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You say these things, but you don’t live it, do you? When you 
depend on anything it de stroys freedom, doesn’t it? It makes you a slave—to 
alcohol, for instance: you must have your drink, your dry Martini or whatever it 
is. So gradually your mind becomes dull through dependency. It was established 
a long time ago in India, that any man w ho is really religious will never touch 
any of these things. But you don’t ca re; you say, “I need stimulation”. 
I once met a man who took LSD and he sa id that when he went to a museum 
after taking it, he could see all the colo urs more brightly, everything stood out 
more vividly, more sharply, there was gr eat beauty. He may see the lovely light 
of a sunset more brilliantly, but his mind is gradually being destroyed and after a 
year or two he becomes just a useless en tity. If you think it is worth it, that’s up 
to you. But if you don’t, then have  nothing whatever to do with it. 
 
SAANEN  
25 JULY 1971 5 
 
 
THOUGHT AND THE IMMEASURABLE  
 
 
Can thought solve our problems? The function of thought. The field of 
thought and its projections. Can the mind enter into the 
immeasurable? What is the factor  of illusion? Physical and mental 
fear and escapes. The mind that is constantly learning. 
Questions: Can one observe without judgment and evaluation? Is 
perception seeing something totally? Can words be used to describe a 
non-verbal state? 
 
 
Some of us feel that the world is so chaotic that if it had been organized by a 
madman it could not be worse than it is at  this present moment . Many feel that 
there must be environmental, economic  and political changes to stop wars, the 
pollution of the air, and to end the material inequality of the very rich and the 
very poor. Many consider that  these things must be change d first, that if there is 
an environmental, peripheral transformati on, then man will be capable of dealing 
with himself more reasonably and wisely. 
I think the problem goes mu ch deeper, is more complex, and that merely to 
change things outwardly will have little effect. Having ob served the events in the 
world, the permissive society of the youn g and the terrible hypocrisy of the older 
generation, an educated and mature mi nd is fully aware that the problem is 
profound and that it demands a totally  different way of dealing with it. 
One also observes that most believe  that all human endeavour can be 
achieved by thought, whether outward ly going to the moon, or inwardly 
transforming one’s mind and heart. We have given tremendous importance to the 
functioning of thought. Thought, whether it be logical and objective, or irrational 
and neurotic, has always played an extraordinarily important role throughout the 
ages. Thought is measure; and in brin ging about order and change in society 
thought has shown itself very limited. It  has apparently not succeeded—it may 
have done so superficially but not fundamentally. The wh ole machinery of 
thinking is responsible for the present co ndition of the world; there is no denying 
that. We think that thought can change not only the outward events and 
happenings—the pollution, the violence an d all the rest of it—but that also by 
careful and skilful usage it can transfor m human conditioning, the human way of 
action and our mode of living. 
It is obvious that organized thought is  necessary; that it requires organized 
thought, applied objectively and sanely , to change the environment with its 
pollution and to overcome poverty. The w hole technological world in which we 
live is based on thought with its meas urement; and thought can only function when there is space.  Thought creates its own space, as time, the distance from 
here to there. On that the whole modern world is built. 
Measurement, with its space, which is the very nature of thinking, is 
obviously limited, because thought is conditioned. Thought is the response of 
memory, which is the past; th e response of thought when  challenged is the past. 
And thought apparently has not put an en d to wars; on the c ontrary, thought has 
created wars, it has bred division—re ligious, economic, so cial and so on. 
Thought in itself is  also the cause of fragmentation. 
So one asks: what is the function of  thought which is the response of 
knowledge? Knowledge is always rooted in the past and out  of that thought 
projects the future, which is really a modi fication of the activities of the present. 
So through its knowledge, th ought can project the future , what the world “should 
be”; but apparently the “should be” is never realized. Every philosopher, every 
so-called religious teacher, has projecte d a world of the future based upon 
knowledge of the past; he has projecte d its opposite, or something which is a 
response to the past. So thought has ne ver united man. In fact, thought has 
divided man, because it can only func tion in knowledge and knowledge is 
measurable. So thought can never bring ab out a true relationship between people. 
Therefore, I am asking: what is the function of knowledge, which is the 
known, the past? What is the function of  the response to that past, which is 
thought, in daily life? Have you ever put that question to yourself? One lives and 
acts by thought; all our calculations, our relationships, our behaviour, are based 
on thought, on knowledge . That knowledge is more  or less measurable; and 
knowledge is always in the field of th e known. So can you  and I realize the 
importance of knowledge yet see its limitati ons and go beyond it? This is what I 
want to find out. 
I see that if you are always functioning in the field of knowledge, you will 
always be a prisoner; you will always be limited within e ither expansive or 
narrow borders which are measurable. Therefore the mind will be held within the 
frontiers of knowledge. I am asking my self whether that knowledge, which is 
experience, gathered in the last few days  or through many centuries, can free man 
so that he can function who lly, differently, so that he is not always living in the 
past, which is knowledge. This question has been put differently by many serious 
people, specially in the re ligious world; the scholars,  the pundits and gurus who 
have talked with me have always aske d whether man can go beyond time. Action 
in the field of knowledge is measurable, so unless man is free of that field, he 
will always be a slave. He may do all kinds of  things within that field, but he will 
always live within the limitations wh ich are time, measure and knowledge. 
Please put this question to yourself. Must man always be bound to the past? If 
he is, then he cannot ever be free; he will always be conditio ned. He may project 
an idea of freedom, of heaven, and es cape from the actual fact of time by 
projecting a belief, a concept, or escape in to an illusion—but it is still an illusion. 
So I want to find out if man can be free of time and yet still function in this 
world. Obviously there is chronological tim e—today, tomorrow, next year and so 
on. If there were no chronological time I sh ould miss my train, so I realize that 
there must be time in order to function, but that time is alwa ys measurable. The action of time, which is knowledge, is absolu tely necessary. But if that is the only 
way in which I can live and function then I am entirely bound, I am a slave. My 
mind observes, looks, enquires and wants to find out if it can ever free itself from 
the shackles of time. The mind  rebels against the idea of being a slave to time; 
being caught in this trap, it rebels against the idea of living in a culture which is 
based on thought, time and knowledge. 
Now the mind wants to find out whether it is possible to go beyond time. Can 
it enter into the immeasurable—which has its own space—and live in that world, 
free of time and yet function with time, with knowledge and a ll the technological 
achievements which thought has brought about? This is a very important 
question. 
Can the mind enquire into the quality  and nature of the immeasurable?—
knowing that any projection by thought, an y form of illusion, is still within the 
field of rime, hence of knowledge. Ther efore the mind must be entirely free from 
any movement which might create illusion. It  is very easy to imagine one is in a 
timeless world, to have all kinds of illu sions and think one has caught God by the 
right hand. What is it that creates a fragmentary, neurotic mind which breeds 
deception and illusion? What makes for such a state, and what is the factor of 
illusion? 
One has to go into this question very caref ully. First, you have to be watchful 
never to deceive yourself under any circ umstances, never to be a hypocrite and 
have double standards—the private standa rd and the public standard; saying one 
thing and doing another; thinking one thing and saying something else. That 
requires tremendous honesty, which means I must find out what is the factor in 
the mind which brings about this deceptio n and hypocrisy, this double-talk, the 
various illusions and neurotic distortions; unless the mind is free of any 
distortion, it cannot possibly en quire into the immeasurable. 
What do you think is th e cause of illusions?—the illusion of grandeur, the 
illusion that you have achieve d reality and reached enli ghtenment. One must see 
for oneself very clearly, without analysis, where distortion takes place; distortion 
is hypocrisy, it is the use of imagination where it has no place at all. Imagination 
may be in place when you ar e painting a picture, writing a poem or a book, but if 
imagination says “That exists ”, then you are caught. So  I must not only find out 
the factor of illusion and distortion,  but be completely free of it. 
I wonder if you have ever asked yourse lf whether the mind can be completely 
free of this distorting factor which g overns our every action. The factor of 
distortion is thought; thought cultivates fear, as thought cultivates pleasure. 
Thought says, “I must enter into that timeless state be cause it promises freedom.” 
It wants to achieve, it wants to gain, it wants a greater experience. When thought, 
which is knowledge, functions rationally, ob jectively, sanely, it is not a distorting 
factor. The major factors of distortion are fear and the demand for pleasure 
through gratification, so the mind must be completely free of fear. Can it? Don’t 
say “Yes” or “No”, you do not know. Let’s investigate—please, see the 
importance of this. The factor of distortio n is fear, it is the demand for pleasure, 
gratification, enjoyment—not the pleasure itself, but the demand for pleasure. All 
our moral and religious structure is based on this. So I am asking myself whether the human mind can be completely free of fear. If it cannot be free of fear then 
distortion takes place. 
There is physical fear, the fear of dark ness, the fear of the unknown, of losing 
what one has, the fear of d eath and of not being loved, the fear of not achieving, 
of not fulfilling, the fear of loneliness and of having no re lationship—the small 
physical fears and the much more comp lex and subtle psyc hological fears. Can 
the mind be free of all fears, not only at  the conscious level but at the deep, 
psychological levels? The mind must be co mpletely merciless to find this out, 
otherwise one enters a world of illusion and distortion. 
We all know physical pain through ill he alth and disease. Those pains leave a 
memory and that memory which is thought, says: you must not have that pain 
again, take great care. Thought, thinking  about the past pain, projects the future 
pain and therefore is afraid of the futu re. Now when physical pain occurs, live 
with it and end it—do not carry it over. If you do not end it instantly, then fear 
comes in. That is, I have had great pain  and I see the importance of not having 
fear. That is my vital, intense demand, th at there must be no fear. When the pain 
comes you do not identify yourself with it and carry it over, but you go through 
with it completely and end it.  To end that pain, you have  to live with it, not say, 
“How can I get out of it as quickly as  possible?” When you have pain, can you 
live with it without self-pity  and not complain? You do whatever is necessary to 
end the pain—but when it has gone it is finished. You do not carry it over as memory. It is though t that carries it over; the pain  has gone, but thought—which 
is the response of memory—has establishe d that memory and says “you must not 
have that pain again”. So when you ha ve pain, is it possible not to build a 
memory of it? Do y ou know what this means? It means to be co mpletely aware 
when you have pain, to be completely attentive, so th at the pain is not carried 
over as memory. Do it, if you are interested in it. 
Then there are all the psychological fears which are much  more complex; 
again the complexity is brought about through t hought. “I want to be a great man 
and I am not”—so there is the pain of not achieving. Or I have compared myself with somebody who I think is  superior, therefore I feel inferior and I suffer from 
that. All this is the measurement of thought. And I am afraid of death and the ending of everything I possess. There is  the whole psychological complexity of 
thought. Thought is alwa ys wanting to be sure and always frightened of 
uncertainty, always wanting to achieve, knowing it may fail. There is a battle between the action of thought and though t itself. So can fear end completely? 
Sitting here listening to the speaker, at  this present moment, you are not 
afraid; there is no fear because you ar e listening. And you can’t evoke fear, 
which would be artificial. But you can see that when you are attached or 
dependent, this is based on fear. Y ou can see your attachments, your 
psychological de pendency on your wife, your husba nd, your books, or whatever 
it is. If you watch closely you will discover that the root of that attachment is 
fear. Not being able to be  alone, you want companionship; feeling inadequate, 
empty, you depend on somebody else. In th at you see the whole structure of fear. 
Being dependent and attached, can you see the involvement of fe ar in it? And can 
you be psychologically  independent of anyone? Now comes the test. We can play with words, with ideas, but when it comes to th e actual fact, we withdraw. When 
you withdraw and do not face the f act, you are not concerned with the 
understanding of illusion;  you would rather live in an illusion than go beyond it. 
Don’t be a hypocrite: you love to live in an  illusion, in deception,  so face it. Then 
you will come upon fear; remain with it, don ’t fight it. The more you fight it, the 
more there is fear. But if you understand the whole nature of fear, then, as you 
observe, you are not only aware of the superficial, conscious fears, but also you 
penetrate deeply into the inner recesses of your mind. Then fear completely 
comes to an end and the f actor of distortion ends. 
If you are pursuing or demanding pleasure, that also is a factor of distortion: 
“I don’t like this guru, but I like that one”; “My guru is  wiser than your guru; “I 
will go to the remote corners of the earth to find truth”—b ut truth is just around 
the corner, here! When there is a demand for pleasure, in any form, this must be a 
distorting factor. Enjoyment is right, isn’t it?  It is beautiful to enjoy the sky, the 
moon, the clouds, the hills, the shadows— there are lovely things on earth. But 
the mind, thought, says, “I must have more  and more, I must repeat this pleasure 
tomorrow.” On this demand is based the whole habit of drink and drugs, which 
again is the activity of thought. You s ee the mountains in the evening light, the 
snow peaks and the shadows in the da rk valley, you enjoy the beauty, the 
loveliness of it tremendously. Then thought says, “I must see that again tomorrow, it was so beautif ul.” So thought, demandi ng pleasure, pursues the 
experience of the sunset on those hills a nd sustains this memory; and the next 
time you see the sunset that memory is  strengthened. Can the mind see that 
sunset, live with it completely at that  moment and finish with it—and begin 
afresh tomorrow? So that the mi nd is always free from the known. 
There is a freedom which is not meas urable. You can never say, “I am 
free”—you understand? It is an abomination.  All you can do is to enquire into the 
function of thought and discover for yours elf if there is an action which is not 
measurable, which is not in the field of  the known. A mind that is constantly 
learning has no fear and perhaps su ch a mind can then enquire into the 
immeasurable. 
 
Questioner: Can one obsewe without any  evaluation, without any judgment, 
without any prejudice? Is that at all possibl e, or is it just another trick of the 
mind, a deception? You see a mountain and you recognize that it is a mountain, 
not an elephant. To differentiate in this  way, surely, there must be judgment and 
evaluation? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You see the mountain, you rec ognize it and the recognition is 
only possible when a memory of the moun tain has been established. Obviously, 
otherwise you can’t recognize it. 
 
Questioner: I remember when I came to Switzerland as a small child and I saw a 
mountain for the first tim e, it was without any remembrance. It was very 
beautiful. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, Sir, when you see it for the first time you don’t say, “It is a 
mountain”. Then somebody tells you that it is a mountain and the next time you 
recognize it as such. Now, when you ob serve, there is the whole process of 
recognition. You don’t confuse the mountain with a house or an elephant, it is a 
mountain. Then the difficult problem arises : to observe it non-verbally. “That is a 
mountain”, “I like it or I don’t like it”, “I wish I could live up there”, and so on. It 
is fairly easy just to observe it, because the mountains do not affect your life. But 
your husband, your wife, your neighbour, your son or daughter, they affect you; 
therefore, you cannot observe them withou t evaluation, without the image. This 
is where the problem arises—can you look at the mountain and at your wife or 
your husband, without a single image? See what happens! If you can observe 
without an image, then you are looking at them for th e first time, aren’t you? 
Then you are look ing at the earth, the stars, th e mountains, or the politician, for 
the first time. That means your eyes are clear, not dimmed with the burden of 
past memories. That is all. Go into it. Work at it. You will find out the enormous 
beauty that is in this. 
 
Questioner: If you look at a factory that way, without being aware of what it does 
to the environment, you cannot act. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : On the contrary, you see that is  polluting the air, belching forth 
smoke, so you want to do something. Don’ t confuse it, keep it simple. Do it, and 
you will see what action comes out of it. 
 
Questioner: Is perception seeing some thing totally, and is it gradual or 
instantaneous? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Can I observe all of myself tota lly, all the reactions, the fears, 
the enjoyments and the pursuit of pleasure, all that, at a glance ? Or do I have to 
do it gradually? What do you think? If I do it little by little, look one day at one 
part of myself, the next day at another pa rt, can it be done that way? Today I look 
at a fragment of myself and tomorrow at a nother; what is the relationship of the 
first fragment to the second one? And in  the interval between the perception of 
the first and the second fragment, other fa ctors have come into being. So this 
fragmentary examination, observing little by little, leads to a great deal of 
complexity; in fact, it has no value. My question th en is: can I observe non-
fragmentarily, totally , on the instant? 
I have been conditioned to look at  myself, to look  at the world 
fragmentarily—as a Christian,  a Communist, a Hindu. I ha ve been brought up in 
this culture to look at th e world fragmentarily. Being conditioned by this culture, 
I cannot possibly take a total view. My chief concern then  is to be free of this 
culture, this education, and not whether I can see completely or not. To free the 
mind from fragmentation, not to be a Catho lic or a Protestant—to wipe away all 
that! I can wipe away all th at instantly when I see the truth of it; I cannot see the 
truth of it if I love being a Hindu, because that gives me  a certain position. I wear 
a turban and impress a lot of  silly people. And I take pl easure in the past, because tradition says, “We are one of the most ancient races”; that gives me great 
delight. But I can only see the truth when I see the falseness of all that. The truth 
is in the falseness. 
 
Questioner: You have been us ing words to describe a non -verbal state of mind. Is 
not this a contradiction? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The description is never the described; I can describe the 
mountain, but the description is not the mountain, and if you are caught in the 
description, as most people are, then you will never see the mountain. There is no 
contradiction. Please be very careful. I di d not describe the immeasurable, I said: 
you cannot enquire into that—whatever it is—unless the mind understands the 
whole process of thought. So I only de scribed the functioning of thought in 
action with regard to time and knowledge; to describe the other is impossible. 
 
SAANEN  
27 JULY 1971 6 
 
 
THE ACTION OF WILL AND THE ENERGY  
NEEDED FOR RADICAL CHANGE  
 
 
Great energy needed; its wastage. Will is resistance. Will as assertion 
of the “me”. Is there action without  choice, which is not motivated? 
“To look with eyes that are not conditioned.” Choiceless awareness of 
conditioning. To see and reject the falseness. What love is not. To face 
the question of death. “The ending of energy as the ‘me’ is the 
capacity to look at death.” Energy  to look at the unknown: supreme 
energy is intelligence. 
Questions: We understand intellectually, but can’t live it; is a man 
capable? How to listen? Are not feelings and emotions the cause of violence? 
 
 
One needs a great deal of en ergy, vitality, interest to br ing about a radical change 
in oneself. If we are interested in outw ard phenomena, we have to see what we 
can do with the rest of the world in the process of ch anging ourselves; and also 
we must see not only how to conserve  energy, but how to increase it. We 
dissipate energy endlessly, by useless talk, by having innumerable opinions about 
everything, by living in a world of conc epts, formulas, and by the everlasting 
conflict in ourselves. I think all this wa stes energy. But beyond that, there is a 
much deeper cause that dissi pates the vital energy that  is necessary not only to 
bring about a change in ourselves, but also to penetrate very deeply beyond the 
confines of our own thought. 
The ancients said, control se x, hold your senses on a tight rein, take vows so 
that you don’t dissipate your energy: you must concentrate your energy on God, or whatever it is. All such disciplines ar e also a wastage of energy, because when 
you take a vow, it is a form of resistance. It needs energy not only for a 
superficial external change, but also to bring about a deep, inward transformation 
or revolution. One must have an extr aordinary sense of energy which has no 
cause, which has no motive, which has the capacity to be utterl y quiet, and this 
very quietness has its own explosive quality . We are going to go into all that. 
One sees how human beings waste their energy, in quarrels, in jealousies, in a 
tremendous sense of anxiety, in the ever lasting pursuit of pleasure and in the 
demand for it; it is fairly obvious that this is a wastag e of energy. And is it not 
also a wastage of energy to have innumerable opinions and beliefs about 
everything?—how another should behave, what  another should do and so on. Is it 
not a waste of energy to have formulas and concepts? In th is culture we are 
encouraged to have concepts accord ing to which we live. Don’t you have formulas and concepts in the sense of ha ving images of how you should be, what 
should happen?—in the sens e of thought which rejects “what is” and formulates 
“what should be”? All such endeavour is a waste of en ergy and I hope we can 
proceed from there. 
What is the basic reason behind dissi pation of energy? Ap art from the cultural 
patterns that one has acquired of wasting en ergy, there is a much  deeper question, 
which is: can one function, and carry on daily life without any form of 
resistance? Resistance is will. I know  you are all brought up to use will, to 
control, in the sense of “you must, you must not, you should, you should not”. 
Will is independent of the fact. Will is the assertion of the self, of the “me”, 
independent of “what is”. Will is desire; the manifestation of desire is will. We 
function superficially, or at great depth, in this assertion of the resistance of 
desire as will, which is unrelated to the “fact” but dependent on  the desire of the 
“me”, of the self. 
Knowing what will is, I am asking: is it possible to live in this world without 
the operation of will at all? Will is a form of resistan ce, a form of division. “I 
will” against something “I will not”, “I must” against “I must not”. So will is 
building a wall in action against every othe r form of action. We only know action 
either as conforming to a formula, to a concept, or as approximating according to 
an ideal and acting in relationship to that ideal, to that pattern. That is what we 
call action and in that there is conflict. There is imitation of what “should be”, 
which we have projected as an ideal according to which we act; therefore there is 
a conflict between the act and the ideal, because in that there is always an 
approximation, imitation, conformity. I feel that is a total wastage of energy and I 
am going to show why. 
I hope we are watching our own activ ities, our own minds, to see how we 
exercise will in action. To repeat, will is independent of the fact, of “what is”; it 
depends on the self, on what it wants—not  on “what is”, but on what it wants. 
And that want is depending on circumst ances, on the environment, the culture 
and so on; it is divorced from the fact . Therefore there is contradiction and 
resistance against “what is”, and that is a wastage of energy. 
Action means the doing now—not tomorro w, not having acted. Action is in 
the present. Can there be action without an idea, without a formula, without a 
concept?—an action in which there is no resi stance as will. If th ere is will there 
is contradiction, resistance and effort, whic h is a wastage of energy. So I want to 
find out if there is an action without an y will as the assertion of the “me” in 
resistance. 
You see, we are slaves to  the present culture, we are the culture, and if there 
is to be a different kind of action, a di fferent kind of life and so a different kind 
of culture altogether—not the counterculture, but something entirely different—
one must understand this whole question of will. Will belongs to th e old culture 
in which is involved ambition and drive, the whole assertion and aggression of 
the “me”. If there is to be a totally diffe rent way of living, one has to understand 
the central issue, which is: can there be action without formula, concept, ideal, or 
belief? An action based on knowledge, which is the past , which is conditioned, is 
not action. Being conditioned and dependent on the past, it must inevitably create discord and therefore conflict. So I want to  find out if there is an action in which 
there is no will at all and choice does not enter. 
We said the other day, where there is confusion there must be choice. A man 
who sees things very clearly  (not neurotically or obstin ately) does not choose. So 
choice, will, resistance—the “me” in acti on—is wastage of en ergy. Is there an 
action unrelated to all this so  that the mind lives in this  world, functioning in the 
field of knowledge and yet free to act w ithout the impediment of the limitation of 
knowledge? The speaker says there is an action in which there is no resistance, 
no interference of the past, no response of  the “me”. That action is instantaneous 
because it is not in the field of tim e—time being yesterday, with all the 
knowledge and experience which acts toda y, so that the future is already 
established by the past. There is an ac tion which is instanta neous and therefore 
complete, in which will does not operate at all. To find that out the mind must 
learn how to observe, how to see. If the mind sees according to a formula of what 
you should  be, or what I should be, then the action is of the past. 
Now I am asking: is there an action wh ich is not motivated, which is in the 
present and which does not br ing contradiction, anxiety and conflict? As I said, a 
mind which has been trained in a culture  which believes and functions and acts 
with will, such a mind o bviously cannot act in  the sense we are talking about, 
because it is conditioned. So can the mind—your mind—see this conditioning 
and be free of it so as to act differently? If my mind is trained through education to function with will, then it cannot possibly understand what it is to act without 
will. Therefore my concern is not to find  out how to act without will, but rather 
to find out if my mind can be free of its  conditioning, which is the conditioning 
of will. That is my concern, and I see, as  I look into myself, that everything I do 
has a secret motive, is the outcome of some anxiety, of some fear, of the demand 
for pleasure and so on. Now can that mind free itself instantly to act differently? 
So the mind must learn how to look. That, for me, is the central problem. Can 
this mind, which is the re sult of time, of various cultures, experiences and 
knowledge, look with eyes  that are not conditioned? That is, can it operate 
instantly, being free of its conditioning?  So I must learn to look at my 
conditioning without any desire to change, to transform, to go beyond it. I must 
be capable of looking at it as it is. If I wa nt to change it, th en I bring about the 
action of will again. If I want  to escape from it, there is again a resistance. If I 
keep one part and reject others, again it means choice. And choice, as we pointed 
out, is confusion. So can I, can this mi nd, look without any resistance, without 
any choice? Can I look at the mountains, the trees, my neighbour, my family, the 
politicians, the priests, without any image?  The image is the past. So the mind 
m u s t  b e  a b l e  t o  l o o k .  W h e n  I  l o o k  a t  “what is” in myself and in the world, 
without resistance, then out of that observation there is instant action which is not 
the result of will. Do you understand? 
I want to find out how to live and act in this world; not  go off into a 
monastery, or escape to some Nirvana a sserted by some guru who promises, “If 
you do this, you will get that”—all that is nonsense. Putting that aside, I want to 
find out how to live in this world without any resistance, without any will. I also 
want to find out what love is. So my  mind which has been conditioned to the demand of pleasure, of gratif ication, of satisfaction a nd therefore of resistance, 
sees all that is not love. So what is love? You know , to find out what is, one must 
deny, put aside totally what  is not. Through negation co me to the positive; do not 
seek the positive, but come to it by understanding what it is not. That is, if I want 
to find out what truth is, not knowing what  it is, I must be able to see what is 
false. If I do not have the ca pacity to perceive what is  false, I cannot see what 
truth is. So I must find out what is false. 
What is false? Everything is fals e that thought has put together—
psychologically not technologically. That is, thought has put together the “me”, 
the self with its memories, with its aggr ession, with its sepa rativeness, with its 
ambitions, competitiveness, imitation, fear and past memories; all that has been 
put together by thought. And thought ha s put together the most extraordinary 
things mechanically. So th ought, as the me, which ha s in essence no reality 
whatsoever, is the false. Wh en the mind understands what is false, then the truth 
is there. Similarly, when the mind rea lly enquires deeply into what is love, 
without saying “it is this”, “it is that”, but enquires, then it mu st see what it is not 
and completely drop it; otherw ise you can’t find the real . Is one capable of doing 
that? To say for instance, “Love is not  ambition”. A mind that is ambitious, 
wanting to achieve, wanting to become powe rful, that is aggressive, competitive, 
imitative, such a mind cannot possibly und erstand what love is—we see that, 
don’t we? 
Now can the mind see the falseness of it? Can it see that a mind that is 
ambitious cannot possibly love and drop it instantly because it is false? Only 
when you deny the false comple tely, then the other is. So can we see very clearly 
that a mind seeking gain, or achievement, either in the world, or in the so-called 
spiritual seeking of enlightenment, cannot lo ve? The drive to find out, to achieve 
is ambition. Therefore can the mind see th e falseness of it and completely drop it 
instantly? Otherwise you won’t find out “w hat is”, and you will never find out 
what love is. Love is not jealousy, is it? Love is not possessiveness, it is not 
dependency. Do you see that? Do not carry  it over with you to the next day but 
drop it instantly. The dropping of it instantly does no t depend on will. It depends 
on whether you actually see the falseness of it. When you dr op that which is 
false, that which is  not, the other is. 
Now it becomes a little more di fficult. Is love pleasure ? Is love fulfilment? If 
you really want to have a mind that has love, you have to go into it very deeply. 
We are asking: is love pleasure, gratif ication, fulfilment? We said that the 
demand for pleasure is the continuity of  thought, which pursues pleasure as 
desire and will, separate from “what is”. We have associated love with sex, and because there is pleasure in it we have ma de an extraordinary thing of it. Sex has 
become the most important thing in life.  We have tried to find some deep 
meaning in it, a deep reality, a sens e of great union, oneness, and other 
transcendental things. Why has sex such significance in  our life? Probably we 
have nothing else; maybe in every othe r field we are mechanical. There is 
nothing original in ourselves, nothing creative—not “creative” in the sense of 
producing pictures, songs and poems, that is a very superficial part of what is 
really a sense of creativeness. As we are more or less second-hand people, sex and pleasure have become extraordinarily important. That is why we call it love, 
and behind that mask we do a ll kinds of mischievous things. 
So can we find out what love is? This has been a question man has always 
asked. Not being able to find out this he says, “L ove God”, “Love an idea”, 
“Love the State”, “Love your neighbour”. Not that you shouldn’t love your 
neighbour, but this has become merely a social operation; it is not the love that is 
always new. So love is not the product of thought, whic h is pleasure. As we said: 
thought is old, not free, it is the response of the past, and so love has no real 
relationship with thought. As we know, most of our life is a battle, the strain, the 
anxiety, the guilt, the despair, the immense sense of loneliness and sorrow, that is 
our life. That is actually “what is” and we are unwilling to face it. When you face 
it without choice and resistan ce, what takes place? Can you face it?—not try to 
overcome fear, jealousy, this or that, but actually look at it without any sense of wanting to change it, conquer it, control it, just to observe it totally, and give 
your whole attention to it. When you look  at our daily life of travail, our daily 
bourgeois or non-bourgeois life, what ta kes place? Haven’t you then tremendous 
energy? Energy has been dissipated in resistance, in overcoming, in going beyond it, trying to understand it, trying to change it. So when you do look at this 
life as it is, is there not then a transfor mation of “what is”? That transformation 
takes place only when you ha ve this energy in which the operation of will does 
not exist at all. 
You know, we like explana tions, we like theories, we  indulge in speculative 
philosophy and we are carried away by al l that which is so obviously such a 
waste of time and energy. We must face wh at actually is: the misery, the poverty, 
the pollution, the wretched division of peoples and na tions, the wars which we 
human beings have created —they haven’t come into existence miraculously, 
each one of us is responsible for all th is—we must face what actually is. And 
also we must face one of the most important  things in life, which is death. That is 
one of the things that man avoids a ll the time. Ancient as well as modern 
civilizations have tried to  go beyond that, to someho w conquer it, to imagine 
there is immortality, a life after death—anything but face it. Can my mind face something of which it knows ab solutely nothing? Most of  you, unfortunately, if I 
may say so, have read so much about th ese things. You have probably read what 
Indian philosophers and teachers have sa id; or you have read other philosophers 
and had your Christian training. You ar e full of other people’s knowledge, 
assertions and opinions. You are bound to  be, although you may not consciously 
acknowledge it, it is there in the blood because you were brought up in this 
civilization and culture. And here is so mething of which you know absolutely 
nothing. All you know is that you are fright ened of coming to an end. And that is 
what death is. 
Fear prevents you from looking at it, as fear has prevented you from living 
without anxiety, sorrow, guilt—you know all that brut al business. Fear has 
prevented you from living and fear preven ts you from looking at what death is. 
Fear demands comfort and so there is the idea of reincarnation, the renewal in 
another life and so on. We won’t go into  this because what we are concerned 
with is, whether your mind can face the r eality of an ending. That is what is going to happen, whether you are healthy,  or a cripple, or fairly well off, 
anything can happen—old age,  disease, or accident. Ca n the mind look at this 
enormous unknown question? Can you look at it as though for the first time?—
having nobody to tell you what  to do, knowing that to find comfort is an escape 
from the fact. So can you, as though for the first tim e, face something which is 
inevitable? 
What is the state of mind that is capabl e of looking at something of which it 
knows absolutely no thing—except that there is or ganic death? The organism 
comes to an end through he art failure, through tension,  through disease, and so 
on. But the psychological question is: can  the mind face something, realizing it 
knows absolutely nothing about it, l ook at it, live with it and understand it 
completely? Which means, can it look at  it without any sense of fear? The 
moment you have fear you have choice, ther e is will, there is resistance, and that 
is a wastage of energy. The ending of energy as the “me” is the capacity to look at death. 
To face something of which I know ab solutely nothing demands great energy, 
doesn’t it? I can only do th at when there is no will, no resistance, no choice, no 
wastage of energy. To face  something unknown, there mu st be the highest form 
of energy, and when there is that total energy, is there a fear of death? Or is there 
a fear of continuity? It is only when I have lived a life of resistance, will and 
choice that there is fear of not being, or of not living. When the mind is faced 
with the unknown , and all these things have go ne, there is tremendous energy. 
And when there is that s upreme energy, which is inte lligence, is there death? 
Find out. 
 
Questioner: Sir, this morning you have questioned what the religions say, which 
prompts me to ask: how is it that  I can understand what you say on an 
intellectual level? It seems to be sensib le, it seems to be reasonable, and yet I 
lack the passion. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The questioner says: what you say makes some sense 
intellectually, verbally, bu t somehow it does not penetr ate, it does not go very 
deep, it does not touch the source of things  so that I can break  through. It does 
not bring that sense of driving vitality, that sense of living with it. I am afraid that 
is the case with most people. 
(Interruption. ) 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Please don’t answer. Let us exam ine. The gentleman says: what 
you say is logical, intellectually I accept it, but I don’t feel it deep in my heart so 
as to bring about a change, a revolution in  myself and to live  a totally different 
kind of life. And I say: that is the case with most of us. We go part of the way, take the journey a little distance and then  drop out. We keep up  the interest for 
ten minutes and the rest of the time th ink about something else. You go away 
after the talk and carry on with your daily life. Now why does this happen? 
Intellectually, verbally, logically, you understand; but apparently it does not touch you deeply, so that you will burn ou t the old, like a fire. Why doesn’t this happen? Is it lack of interest? Is it a sense of deep laziness, of indolence? 
Examine it, Sir, don’t answer me. If it is  lack of interest, why aren’t you 
interested? When the house is burning —your house—when your children are 
going to grow up to get killed, why aren’t you in terested? Are you blind, 
insensitive, indifferent, callous? Or deep  down haven’t you go t the energy and 
are therefore lazy? Examine it, don’t ag ree or disagree. Have you become so 
insensitive because you have  your own problems? You want to fulfil, you are 
inferior, you are superior, you are anxious,  you have a great se nse of fear—there 
is all that; and your proble ms are smothering you, theref ore you are not interested 
in anything unless you solve your problems  first. But your problems are the other 
man’s problems, your problems are the resu lt of this culture in which you live. 
So what is it? Total indifference, insens itivity, callousness? Or is it that your 
whole culture and training has been inte llectual, verbal? Your philosophies are 
verbal, your theories are the product of tremendously cunning brains and you 
have been brought up in th at. Your whole education is  based on it. Is it that 
thought has been given su ch extraordinary importanc e?—the clever, cunning, 
capable, technological mind, the mind that  can measure, construct, fight and 
organize. You have been trained in that and you respond on that level. You say, 
“Yes, I agree with you intellectually, verb ally, I see the logic, the sequence of it.” 
But you cannot go be yond it because your mind is caught in the operations of 
thought which is measurem ent. Thought cannot measure depth or height, but 
only on its own level. 
So this is really an im portant question for everybo dy, because most of us 
agree with all this verba lly, intellectually, but somehow the fire doesn’t get lit. 
 
Questioner: I think there is no change be cause the important things are not on 
the intellectual level but on another plane. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is what we said, Sir. Th ere is no change, the gentleman 
says, because psychologically, economically, socially, in education, we are conditioned. We are the resu lt of the culture in which we live. And he says as 
long as that is not changed in us we w on’t take any deep interest. So what is 
going to make you interested? I am asking:  why is it that though you listen to all 
this logically, and I hope with a healthy mind, this does not light a fire so that 
you burn with it? Please ask yourselv es, find out why you agree logically, 
verbally, superficially, yet it does not t ouch you deeply. If your money or your 
sex is taken away it will touch you. If your sense of importance is taken away, 
then you will struggle. If yo ur gods, your nationalism, your petty bourgeois life is 
taken away, you will fight like cats and dogs. Which all indicates that 
intellectually we are capable  of anything. Technologi cally, going to the moon, 
we live on the level of thought, but th ought cannot possibly ignite the flame 
which changes man. What changes man is to face all this, to look at it and not always live on that very superficial level. 
 Questioner: You said this morning that when you are capable of  looking at death 
as the absolute unknown, that includes that you are also capable of looking at 
life as it is, and that yo u are capable of action. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, Sir. “When you are capabl e.” The word “capable” is a 
difficult word. Capacity mean s working, or to have capacity for something. You 
can cultivate capacity. I can cultivate the capacity to play  golf or tennis, or to put 
machinery together. Now we are not usi ng the word “capacity ” in the sense of 
time—you understand? Capacity involves time, doesn’t it? That is, I am not 
capable now, but give me a year and I’ll be capable of speaking Italian, French or 
English. If you have underst ood capacity as time, it is  not what I mean. I mean: 
observe the unknown w ithout any fear, live w ith it. That does no t need capacity. I 
said you will do it, if you know wh at is false and reject that. 
 
Questioner: Is it not a question of not kn owing how to listen? You have said that 
to listen is one of the hardest things to do. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, it is one of the hardest thin gs to do, to listen. Do you mean 
to say that a man who is committed to social activity and has put all his life into 
it, is he ever going to listen to any of this? Or a man who says, “I have taken a 
vow of celibacy”—will he listen to all this ? No, Sir. Listening is quite an art. 
 
Questioner: You were saying that the d ifficulty is on the intellectual level and 
that we do not allow our feelings and ou r emotions to come into our relations 
with other people. But I have the impression it is exactly the contrary. I think that 
the trouble in the world is caused by  uncontrolled emotions and passions, 
probably born out of lack of understanding, but they are passions. We live a 
violent life. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Violent, of course, that’s u nderstood. Now, do you live an 
emotional life which needs conquering? Em otional, excited, the enthusiasms of 
pleasure and sentiment—do you live in th at world? And when you do live in that 
world and when it gets disorderly, then the intellect comes in and you begin to 
control it, saying “I must not”; but the intellect always dominates. 
 
Questioner: Or it justifies. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It justifies or condemns. I ma y be greatly emotional but the 
intellect comes along and says : look, be careful, try to  control yourself. Intellect 
always dominates—which is thought—doe sn’t it? In my relationship with 
another I get angry, irritated, emotiona l. Then what happen s? That leads to 
trouble, a quarrel takes place between tw o human beings. Then I try to control 
it—which is thought; because it has estab lished a pattern for itself of what it 
should do, or what it should  not do, saying, “I must control”. So we say, “There 
must be control,” otherwise relationship breaks down. Is n’t all that a process of 
thinking, of intellection? The intellect plays a tremendous part in our life, that is all we are pointing out. We are not saying emotions are wrong or right, or true or 
false, but thought with its measurem ent is always judging, evaluating, 
controlling, overcoming, and therefore thought prevents you from looking. 
 
SAANEN  
29 JULY 1971 7 
 
 
THOUGHT, INTELLIGENCE, AND  
THE IMMEASURABLE  
 
 
Different meanings of space. The space we think and act from; the 
space that thought has built. How is  one to have immeasurable space? 
“To carry our burden and yet to seek freedom.” Thought which does 
not divide itself is moving in experiencing. The meaning of 
intelligence. Harmony: mind, heart and organism. “Thought is of 
time, intelligence is not of time.” Intelligence and the immeasurable. 
Questions: Hatha Yoga. Is there separation of observer and observed 
in technological work? Awareness and sleep. 
 
 
We have been talking about the various co ntradictory states of the world, outside 
our skin as it were, about the tortures of the refugees, and th e horrors of war, 
about poverty, the religious and national separations of people, and the economic 
and social injustice. These are not merely  verbal statements but actual facts of 
what is going on in the world: violence,  terrible disorder, hatreds and every form 
of corruption. And in ourselves the same  phenomenon is going on; we are at war 
with ourselves, unhappy, dissatisfied, seeking something which we don’t know 
about, violent, aggressive, corrupt, as tonishingly miserable and lonely and 
suffering a great deal. Somehow we don’t seem to be able to get out of this, to be 
free of these conditionings. We have tried every form of beha viour and therapy, 
of religious sanctions and their pursuits, the monastic life, a life of sacrifice, 
denial, suppression and blindl y seeking, going from one book to another, or from 
one religious guru to another; or we try political reforms, and make re volutions. 
We have tried so many things and yet so mehow we don’t seem to be able to free 
ourselves from this terrible mess inside  ourselves as well as outwardly. We 
follow the latest guru who offers some system, a panacea, some way to crawl out of our own misery, and that again does not  seem to resolve any of our problems. 
I think the average person here asks: I know I am caught in the trap of 
civilization, miserable, sorrowful, and lead ing rather a small, narrow life. I have 
tried this and that, but somehow all this chaos is still in me . What am I to do? 
How am I to get out of all this confusion? 
 
During these talks we have gone into various things: order, fear, pain, love, death 
and sorrow. But at the end of these mee tings most of us are where we began, 
with slight peripheral changes, but at  the very root of our being our whole 
structure and nature more or less remains as it was. How is all that to be really 
jolted, so that when you leave this place, at least for one day, for one hour, there will be something totally new, a life that  really has significance, has meaning, 
depth and width? 
I don’t know if you have noticed the mountains this morning, the river and 
the changing shadows, the pine trees da rk against the blue sky, and those 
extraordinary hills full of li ght and shade. On a morning like this, sitting in a tent 
to talk about serious things  seems rather absurd, when  everything about us is 
crying with great joy, shouting to the heavens the beauty of the earth and the 
misery of man. But since we are here , I would like to approach the whole 
problem in a different way. Just listen to  it and not only to the meaning of the 
words, not only to the description, because the description is never the 
described—as when you describe the hills, the trees, the rivers and the shadows, 
if you don’t see them for yourselves, with your heart and your mind, the 
description has very little meaning. It is like describing food to a hungry man; he 
must have food, not just wo rds and the smell of food. 
I don’t quite know how to put all th is differently, but I would like to 
explore—if you will do it with me—a differe nt way of looking at  all this, to look 
from a totally different dimension. Not the usual dimension of “me and you”, 
“we and they”, “my problems”, “their prob lems”, “how to end this and how to 
get that”, how to become more  intelligent, noble, but rath er to see together if we 
can observe all these phenome na from a different dimension. Perhaps some of us 
are not used to that dimension, we don’t  know if there is actually a different 
dimension; we may speculate about it, we may imagine, but speculation and 
imagination are not the fact. So as we are only dealing with facts and not with 
speculations, it behoves us I think not only to listen to what the speaker is going 
to say, but also to try to  go beyond the wo rds and the explanations. It means you 
must also be sufficiently attentive and interested, sufficiently aware of the 
meaning of a dimension which we have prob ably not touched at all, to ask: can I 
look at that dimension this morning, no t with my eyes, but with the eyes of 
objective intelligence and beauty and interest? 
I do not know if you have  ever thought about space. Where there is space 
there is silence. Not the space created by thought, but a space that has no 
frontiers at all, a space that is not m easurable, that cannot be connived at by 
thought, a space that is re ally quite unimaginable. Be cause when man has space, 
real space, width and de pth and an immeasurable sens e of extension, not of his 
consciousness—which is merely another fo rm of thought extending itself with its 
measurement from a centre—but that sens e of space which is not conceived by 
thought, when there is that kind of space there is absolute silence. 
With the overcrowding of cities, th e noise, the expl oding population, 
outwardly there is more and more restriction, there is less and less space. I do not 
know if you have noticed in this valley know new buil dings are going up, there 
are more people, more and more cars polluting the air. Outwardly there is less 
and less space; if you go into any street in a crowded town you will notice this, 
especially in the East. In India you see thousands of people sleeping and living on the overcrowded pavement. And take any big town, London, New York, or 
where you will, there is hardly any space;  the houses are small, people are living 
enclosed, trapped, and where there is no space there is violence. We have no space either ecologically, social ly, or in our own mind; th is is partly responsible 
for the violence, that we have no space. 
In our own minds the space we create is isolation, a world built around 
ourselves. Please do observe this in yourselves and no t only because the speaker 
is talking about it. Our space is a spa ce of isolation and w ithdrawal. We don’t 
want to be hurt any more, we have been  hurt when we were young and the marks 
of hurt remain; so we withdraw, we resist, we build a wall around ourselves and 
around those whom we think we like, or l ove, and that gives a very limited space. 
It is like looking over th e wall into another person’s garden, or into another 
person’s mind, but the wall is still there and in that world there is very little 
space. From that narrow, small, rather sh oddy space we act, we think, we love, 
we function, and from that centre we try to reform the world, jo ining this or that 
party. Or from that narrow hold, we tr y to find a new guru who will teach us the 
latest way to enlightenment. And in our chattering minds, crowded with 
knowledge, rumours and opinions, th ere is hardly any space at all. 
I do not know if you have noticed it, but  if one has been observant, aware of 
the things around one and in  oneself, has not just lived to earn money and have a 
bank account, this and that, one must have seen how little space one has, how 
crowded it is in ourselves. Please watch it in yourself. Being isolated in that little 
space, with enormous thick walls of resist ance, of ideas and of  aggression, how is 
one to have space that is re ally immeasurable? As we sa id the other day, thought 
is measurable, thought is measure. And any form of self-improvement is measurable; obviously, self-improvement is  the most callous form of isolation. 
One sees that thought cannot bring ab out the vast space in which there is 
complete and utter silence. Thought ca nnot bring it, thought can only progress, 
evolve, in ratio to the end it projects, which is measurable. That space which 
thought creates, imaginativ ely, or of necessity, can never enter a dimension in 
which there is space which is  not of thought. Through centuries thought has built 
a space that is very limited, narrow, isolated , and because of this very isolation, it 
creates division; where there is division there is conflict, na tionally, religiously, 
politically, in relationship, in every way. Conflict is measurable—less conflict or 
more conflict, and so on. 
Now the question is: how can thought en ter into the other? Or can thought 
never enter it? I am the result of thought . All my activities, logical, illogical and 
neurotic, or highly educated and scientific  are based on thought.  “I” am the result 
of all that, and it has space within the wa lls of resistance. How is the mind to 
change that and discover something whic h is of a totally different dimension? 
Have you understood my qu estion? Can the two come together?—the freedom in 
which there is complete silence and th erefore vast space, and the walls of 
resistance which thought has created w ith its narrow little space. Can the two 
come together, flow together? This ha s been the problem of man religiously 
when he enquires at great de pth. Can I hold on to my little  ego, to my little space, 
to the things that I have  collected, to my knowledg e, experiences, hopes and 
pleasures, and move into a different dimension where the two can operate? I 
want to sit on the right hand of God and ye t I want to be free of God! I want to 
live a life of great delight, pleasure and beau ty, and also I want to have joy which is not measurable, which cannot be caught by  thought. I want pleasure and joy. I 
know the movement, the demand, the purs uit of pleasure with all its fears, 
travails, sorrow, agony and anxiety. And I also know that joy which is totally 
uninvited, which thought can never capture; if it does capture it, it again becomes 
pleasure and then the old routine begins. So  I want to have both—the things of 
this world and the other world. 
I think this is the problem for most of us—isn’t it?  To have a wonderful time 
in this world—why not?—and avoid all pain, all sorrow, because I also know 
other moments when there is great joy which cannot be touched, which is not 
corrupt. I want both, and that is what we are seeking: to carry all our burden and 
yet to seek freedom. Can I do this throug h will? You remember what we said the 
other day about will? Will ha s nothing what soever to do with the actual, with 
“what is”. But will is the expression of  desire as “me”. We think somehow 
through will we shall come upon the other, so we say to ourselves, “I must 
control thought, I must discipline thought ”. When the “I” says, “I must control 
and discipline thought”, it is thought which has separa ted itself as the “I” and 
controls thought as something separate. It  is still thought: the “I” and the “not I”. 
And one realizes—thought be ing measurable, noisy, chattering, running all over 
the place—that thought has created the spac e of a little rat, a monkey that chases 
its own tail. So one says: how is though t to become quiet? Thought has created 
the technological world of chaos, of war, of national divisions, religious 
separations; thought has bro ught about misery, confusion and sorrow. Thought is 
time, so time is sorrow. And you see all th is if you have gone deeply, not at the 
instruction of another, but merely by observ ing this in the world and in yourself. 
Then the question arises: can thought be completely  silent and only function 
when necessary—when one has to use tec hnical knowledge, in the office, when 
one is talking and so on—and the rest of the time be absolutely  quiet? The more 
there is space and silence, the more it can function logically, sanely, healthily 
with knowledge. Otherwise knowledge beco mes an end in itself and brings about 
chaos. Do not agree with me, see it for yourself. Thought, which is the response 
of memory, of knowledge, experience and time, is the content of consciousness; 
thought must function with knowledge, but it can only function with the highest 
intelligence when there is space and silence—when it functions from there . 
There must be vast space and silence, because when there is that space and 
silence, beauty comes, there is love . Not the beauty put together by man, 
architecture, tapestries, porcelain, paintin gs, or poems, but that sense of beauty, 
of vast space and silence. And yet thought  must act, must function. There is no 
living there , and then coming down. So that is our problem—I am making it a 
problem so that we can investigate toge ther, so that both you and I discover 
something in this which is totally ne w. Because each time one investigates 
without knowing, one di scovers something. But if you investigate with knowing, 
then you will never discover anything. So that is what we are doing. Can thought 
become silent? Can that thought, which mu st function in the field of knowledge 
totally, completely, objectiv ely and sanely, can that thought end itself? That is, 
can thought which is the past, which is memory, which is a thousand yesterdays, can all that past, all that conditioning co me totally to an en d?—so that there is 
silence, there is space, there is a sense of extraordinary dimension. 
I am asking myself and you are asking it with me: how is thought to end and 
not in the very ending of it get perverted,  go off into some imaginative state and 
become rather lopsided, neurotic and va gue? How is that thought, which must 
function with great energy and vitality, to be at the same time completely 
motionless? Have you unde rstood my question? This has been the problem of 
every serious religious man—not the man who belongs to some sect based on 
organized belief and propagan da and therefore not religious at all. Can the two 
operate together, can they move together —not coalesce, not join together—but 
move together? They can only move toge ther if thought does not separate itself 
as the observer and the observed. 
You see, life is a movement in relations hip, constantly moving and changing. 
That movement can sustain itself, move freely, when there is no division between 
the thinker and the thought. That is, wh en thought does not di vide itself as the 
“me” and the “not me”, as the observe r, the experiencer, and the observed, the 
experienced; because in that there is division and therefore conflict. When 
thought sees the truth of th at, then it is not seeking experience, then it is moving 
in experienc ing. Aren’t you doing this now? 
Just now I said thought with all its kn owledge, which is always accumulating, 
is something living; it is not a dead thing, therefor e the vast space can move 
together with thought. When  thought separates itself as the thinker, as the 
experiencer causing division and conflic t, then that experiencer, observer, 
thinker, becomes the past which is sta tionary and therefore cannot move. The 
mind sees in this examination that where there is division in thought, movement 
is not possible. Where there is division the past comes in and the past becomes 
stationary, the immovable centre. The im movable centre can be modified and 
added to, but it is an immovable state and therefore it has no free movement. 
So my next question to myself and so to you is: does thought see this, or is 
perception something entirely different from thought? One sees division in the 
world, national, religious, economic, social and all the rest of it; in this division 
there is conflict, that is clear. And when  there is division and fragmentation in 
myself, there must be conflict. Then I am  divided in myself as the observer and 
the observed, the thinker and the thought, the experiencer and the experience. 
That very division is created by thought, which is the result of the past—I see the 
truth of this. Now my question is: does thought see this, or does some other 
factor see it? Or is the new factor inte lligence and not thought ? Now what is the 
relationship between thought and intellig ence? Do you understand my question? 
I am terribly interested in this personally , you can come with me or not. It is 
extraordinary to go into this. 
Thought has created this di vision: the past, the presen t, the future . Thought is 
time. And thought says to itself: I see th is division outwardly and inwardly, I see 
this division is the factor of conflict. It  is not capable to go beyond it, therefore it 
says: I am where I began, I am still with  my conflicts, because thought says, “I 
see the truth of division and conflict.” Now does thought see that, or does a new 
factor of intelligence see it? If it is in telligence that sees it, what is the relationship between thought and intelligence? Is intelligence personal? Is 
intelligence the result of book knowledge, logic, e xperience? Or is intelligence 
the freedom from the division of thou ght?—the division which thought has 
created. Seeing that logically and not bei ng able to go beyond it, it remains with 
it; it does not try to strugg le with it or to overcom e it. Out of that comes 
intelligence. 
You see, we are asking: what is inte lligence? Can intelligence be cultivated? 
Is intelligence innate? Does thought see the truth of conflict, of  division and all 
the rest of it, or is it the quality of mind th at sees the fact and is completely quiet 
with the fact?—completely silent, not tryi ng to go beyond it, to overcome it, to 
change it, but is completely still with the fact. It is that  stillness that is 
intelligence. Intelligence is not thought. Intelligence is this silence and is 
therefore totally impersonal. It does not be long to any group, to any person, to 
any race, to any culture. 
So my mind has found that there is a silence, not something put together by 
thought, discipline, prac tice and all that horror, bu t a seeing thought cannot 
possibly go beyond its elf; because thought is the re sult of the past  and where the 
past is functioning it must create divi sion and therefore conflicts. Can one see 
that and remain still with it? You know, it is like be ing completely still with 
sorrow. When somebody  dies for whom you care, wh om you have looked after, 
cherished, loved and been concerned with, there is the shock of loneliness, of 
despair, a sense of isolation, everything falls around you; can one remain with 
that sorrow not seeking explanations and the cause, thinking, “Why should he go 
and not I?” To remain comp letely still with it is inte lligence. That intelligence 
can then operate in thought, using knowledge, an d that knowledge and thought 
will not create division. 
So the question arises: how is the mi nd, your mind, which is endlessly 
chattering, endlessly bourgeois—caught in  a trap, struggling, seeking, following 
a guru and using discipline—how is that mind to be completely still? 
Harmony is stillness. There is harm ony between the body, the heart and the 
mind, complete harmony, not discord. That means the body mu st not be imposed 
upon, not disciplined by th e mind. When it likes a certain kind of food, or 
tobacco, or drugs and the excitement of a ll that, to be controlled by the mind is 
an imposition. Whereas the body has its own intelligence when it is sensitive, 
alive and not spoilt; it has its own inte lligence. One must have such a body, 
which is alive, active, not drugged. And also one must have a heart—not 
excitement, not sentiment, not emotion,  not enthusiasm, but that sense of 
fullness, of depth, quality, vigour, that can only be when there is love. And one 
must have a mind that has immense space. Then there is harmony. 
Now how is the mind to come upon this? I am sure you are all asking this, 
perhaps not whilst you are sitting here, but when you go home, when you walk, 
you will ask: how can one have this sense of complete  integrity, of unity of body, 
heart and mind without any sense of dist ortion, division or fragmentation? How 
do you think you can have it? You see th e fact of this, don’t you? You see the 
truth of it, that you must have comple te harmony in yourself, in the mind, the 
heart and the body. It is like having a clear window, without any scratch, unsullied; then, as you look  out through the window you can see things without 
any distortion. How can you have that? 
Now, who sees this truth? Who sees the truth that there must be this complete 
harmony? As we said, when there is ha rmony there is silence. When the mind, 
the heart and the organism ar e completely in harmony there is silence; but when 
one of the three becomes distorted, there is noise. Who sees this fact? Do you see 
it as an idea, as a theory, as something you “should hav e”? If you do, then it is all 
the function of thought. Th en you will say: tell me what kind of system I must 
practise to get this, I will renounce, I will discipline—all that is the activity of 
thought. But when you  see the truth of this—the truth, not what “should be”—
when you see that is the fa ct, then it is intelligence that sees it. Therefore it is 
intelligence that will function a nd bring about this state. 
Thought is of time, intelligence is not of time. Intelligence is immeasurable—
not the scientific intelligence, not the intelligence of a technician, or of a housewife, or of a man who knows a great deal. Those are all within the field of 
thought and knowledge. It is only when  the mind is completely still—and it can 
be still, you don’t have to practise or control, it ca n be completely still—then 
there is harmony, there is vast sp ace and silence. And only then the 
Immeasurable is. 
 
Questioner: I have been listening to you for fifty years. You ha ve said that one 
has to die every moment. This is more re al to me now than it has ever been. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I understand, Sir. Must you listen to the speaker for fifty years 
and at the end of it you u nderstand what he says? Does  it take time? Or do you 
see the beauty of somethin g instantly and therefore it is? Now why do you and 
others take time over all this? Why must  you have many years to understand a 
very simple thing? And it is very simp le, I assure you. It only becomes complex 
in explanation, but the fact is extrao rdinarily simple. Why doesn’t one see the 
simplicity and the truth and the beauty  of it instantly—and then the whole 
phenomenon of life changes? Why? Is it because we are so heavily conditioned? 
And if you are so heavily conditioned, can’t you see that conditioning instantly, or must you peel it off like an onion, laye r after layer? Is it that one is lazy, 
indolent, indifferent, caught in one’s own problem? If you are caught in one 
problem, that problem is not separate from the rest of the problems, they are all interrelated. If you take one problem whether it is sex, relationship, or loneliness, 
whatever it is—go to the very end of it. But because you can’t do it, you have to 
listen to somebody for fifty years! Are you going to say it takes you fifty years to 
look at those mountains? 
 
Questioner: I would like to know about Hatha Yoga. I know many people who 
practise it but they betray themselves; th ey live obviously in imagination. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I was told that Hatha Yoga a nd all the complications of it was 
invented about three thou sand years ago. I was told this by a man who had 
studied the whole thing very carefully. At that time the rulers of the land had to keep their brains and their thoughts very clear and so they chewed some kind of 
leaf from the Himalayan mountains. As tim e went on the plant died out, and so 
they had to invent a method by which the various glands in the human system could be kept healthy and vi gorous. So they invented Yo ga exercises to keep the 
body healthy and thereby to have a ve ry active, clear mind. The practice of 
certain exercises—asanas and so on—does  keep the glands healthy and active. 
They also found that the right kind  of breathing helps—not to achieve 
enlightenment, but to keep the mind, the brain cells, supplied with sufficient air, 
so that they function well. Then all the exploiters came along and said: if you do 
all these things then you will have a quiet, silent mind. Their silence is the silence of thought, which is corruption and theref ore death. They said : this way you will 
awaken various centres and you will e xperience enlightenment. Of course our 
minds are so eager, so greedy, wanting more experiences, wanting to be better 
than somebody else, better looking, to ha ve a better body, so we fall into that 
trap. The speaker does various exercises, about two hours a day;  don’t copy him, 
you know nothing about it! So long as on e has imagination, which is the function 
of thought, do what you w ill, the mind can never be qui et, peaceful, with a sense 
of great inward beauty and sufficiency. 
 
Questioner: In this harmonious, integrated state, when the mind functions strictly in a technological way, is there then this separati on of the observer and the 
observed? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I understand the question. What do you think? When there is 
complete harmony—real, not imaginary harmony—when the body, the heart and 
the mind are completely harmonious and integrated, when there is that sense of 
intelligence which is harmony,  and that intelligence is  using thought, then will 
there be the division of the observer and the observed? Obviously not. When 
there is no harmony there is fragmentati on, then thought creat es the division as 
the “me” and the “not me”, the observer and the observed. Th is is so simple. 
 
Questioner: You said in your second talk  that one should be aware not only when 
awake but also during sleep. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is there an awarene ss when you are asleep as well as when you 
are awake? Do you understand the ques tion? That is, during the day one is 
superficially or deeply aware of everyt hing that is going on inwardly; one is 
aware of all the movements of thought, th e division, the conflict, the misery, the 
loneliness, one’s demand for pleasure, th e pursuit of ambition, greed, anxiety, 
one is aware of the whole of that. When  you are so aware during the day, does 
that awareness continue during the night in  the form of dreams? Or are there no 
dreams but only an awareness? 
Please listen to this: am I, are you, aware during the day of every movement 
of thought? Be honest, be simple: you ar e not. You are aware in patches. I am 
aware for two minutes, then  there is a great blank and then again a few minutes, 
or half an hour later, I realize I have fo rgotten myself and pick it up again. There are gaps in our awareness—we are never aware continuously and we think we 
ought to be aware all the time. Now first of all, there are great spaces between awareness, aren’t there? There is awaren ess, then unawareness, then awareness 
and so on, during the day. Which is impor tant? To be continuously aware? Or to 
be aware for short periods? What is one to  do with the long periods when one is 
not aware? Amongst those three, what do you think is important? I know what is 
important for me. I am not bothered about being aware for a short period, or wanting to have awareness continuously.  I am only concerned with when I am 
not aware, when I am inattentive. I sa y I am very interested in why I am 
inattentive, and what I am to do about that  inattention, that unawareness. That is 
my problem—not to have constant awareness. You would go crazy unless you had really gone into this very, very  deeply. So my concern is: why am I 
inattentive and what happens in that period of inattention? 
I know what happens when I am aware.  When I am aware nothing happens. I 
am alive, moving, living, v ital; in that nothing can happen because there is no 
choice for something to happen. Now, when  I am inattentive, not aware, then 
things happen. Then I say things which ar e not true, then I am nervous, anxious, 
caught, I fall back into my despair. So why does this happen? Are you getting my 
point? Is that what you are doing? Or are you concerned with being totally aware 
and trying, practising to be aware all the time? 
I see I am not aware, and I am going to watch what happens in that state when 
I am not aware. To be aware that I am not aware is awareness. I know when I am 
aware; when there is an aw areness it is something en tirely different. And I know 
when I am not aware, I get nervous, I twitch my hands, I do all kinds of stupid 
things. When there is attention in that  unawareness the whole thing is over. When 
at that moment of unawareness I am aw are that I am not aware, then it is 
finished; because then I don’t have to stru ggle nor say, “I must be aware all the 
time, please tell me a method to be aware, I must practise and so on”—becoming 
more and more stupid. So you see when there is no awarene ss and I know I am 
not aware, then the whole movement changes. 
Now, what happens during sleep? Is th ere an awareness wh en you are asleep? 
If you are aware during the daytime in patc hes, then that continues while you are 
asleep—obviously. But when you are aware, and also aware that you are 
inattentive, a totally diffe rent movement takes place. Then when you sleep there 
is an awareness of complete quietness. The mind is aware of itself. I won’t go 
into all this, it is no t a mystery, it is not something th at is extraordin ary. You see, 
when the mind is deeply aware during the day, that awareness in depth brings 
about a quality of mind duri ng sleep that is absolutely  quiet. During the day you 
have observed, you have been aware, either in patches, or you have been aware 
of your inattention; then as you go through the day th e activity of the brain has 
established order when you sl eep. The brain demands order, even if that order is 
in some neurotic belief, in nationalism, or in this or that—but in that it finds an 
order which inevitably brings  about disorder. But when you are aware during the 
day, and aware of your unawareness, then at the end of the day there is order; 
then the brain does not have to struggl e during the night to bring about order. Therefore the brain becomes rested, it is quiet. And the next morning the brain is 
extraordinarily alive, not a dead, corrupt, drugged thing. 
 
SAANEN  
1 AUGUST 1971  
 
 
 
 
 
 
EUROPE  
 
VIII 
 
Five Dialogues in Saanen 
 
 
1  The fragmentation of consciousness 
2  Is intelligence awake? 
3  Fear 
4  Fear, time and the image 
5  Intelligence and the religious life 1 
 
 
THE FRAGMENTATION OF CONSCIOUSNESS  
 
 
Are we aware that we look at life fragmentarily? The conditioning of 
consciousness. Do we really know its content? Is there a division into 
conscious and unconscious? The observer  is part of the content of 
consciousness. Is there any agent outside this conditioned content? 
“Tricks I play upon myself.” What  is action? Since the self is 
fragmented, “I” cannot see life as a totality. 
 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Could we in these dialogues work out one problem each 
morning, go into it thoroughly, so that we  really understand it? This is a friendly 
conversation between us in which we can go into a problem together and see if 
we cannot resolve the problem that we take each morn ing. A dialogue  is different 
from a dialectical argument; it is not seekin g truth through opinion, or discussion, 
which means reasoning, logic, argument; th at will not lead us very far. Can we 
take one problem this morning and go into it completely, not deviating from it 
but go into it step by step , in detail, hesitatingly,  not offering an opinion—
because then it is your opinion, your argument, against somebody else’s—and 
also not indulging in ideologies, not quo ting others, but take a problem that is 
vital to each one of us and work it out together? That woul d be worthwhile, I 
feel. Shall we do that? 
 
Questioner (1): Could we discuss order?  
 
Questioner (2): I find that in spite of all you have said I am still left with my 
inner emptiness. The urge to escape from it prevents me from looking—I am 
always escaping.  
 
Questioner (3): I wonder if the method we use t ogether really makes it possible 
for us to make a radical and lasting tr ansformation? Becaus e this method is on 
the conscious level and the forces whic h bind us are on the unconscious level. 
How can we really be liberated from  the unconscious conditioning and motives? 
For instance, if I may give an example, I know lots of people who have been 
following you for many years, they don ’t judge from the point of view of 
nationalities any more, but they judge the hippies, which is the same thing. 
 
Questioner (4): I have a problem in understanding awareness. My mind is aware 
when it is going through something, it labels it, and then I become separate from 
the experience. When I become aware,  there is a separation between the 
observed and the observer.  Questioner (5): What is it to look at life completely?  
 
Questioner (6): You said, “I am the world and the world is me.” What are the 
simple reasons for that assertion?  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Which one of these prob lems shall we take th is morning, so that 
when you and I leave the tent we have really understood it? 
 
Questioner: Do you look at life as good or evil? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : How do you actually look at lif e? Don’t pretend. Don’t let us 
become theoretical, hypothetical, and thereb y slightly dishonest. Do you look at 
life as a whole, or do you look at life in fragments?—all brok en up. Is it possible 
to look at this whole movement as a unitary process? And ca n I, who have been 
brought up in a certain culture wh ich conditions me, consciously or 
unconsciously, to look at God and the Devil—the physical and the non-
physical—can I consider this whole move ment of life, or do I break it up? And 
when you do break it up then, out of that, comes disorde r. Now, how do you 
actually look at life? 
 
Questioner: In most of the discussions I have heard you start w ith the premise of 
disorder, not from the point of view of order. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I don’t posit order, I start with di sorder. We are in disorder, that 
is clear. There is war, the division of  nationalities, there is man and woman 
fighting each other. We are at war with each other an d in ourselves, that is 
disorder. This is the fact. It would be absurd to posit order—there is no order! 
 
Questioner: Is there no t order in natural life? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Probably there is, in nature. But that is not my question. Our 
question is: can you and I look at this  whole phenomenon of existence as one 
unitary movement, not broken up as the conscious and the unconscious? 
 
Questioner: But that would be order. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We are discussing that, I don’ t know where it is going to lead 
us. We are trying to find out through conversation whether our minds are capable 
of looking at life as a whole, as one unitary movement and therefore without 
contradiction. 
 
Questioner: But isn’t the definition of the unconscious that  I am unable to look at 
it? 
 KRISHNAMURTI : We must go into this slowly. Now suppose I cannot look at life 
as a whole. Am I aware that I look at life fragmentarily? Let us begin with that. 
Are you aware, do you know that you divide life? 
 
Questioner (1): No. 
 
Questioner (2): Is not “life as a whole”  an abstract  concept? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : If we posit life as a unitary process, as an idea, then it is a 
concept. But if we realize that we live in fragments and ask whether that 
fragmentary division can be changed,  then we may find out the other. 
 
Questioner: It appears to me that I have to find out what I am  first, before I can 
begin to change. I don’t like hippies, and that’s what I am! Possibly I can change 
it, if I first become what I am. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Look, Sir, we are not talking ab out change. This morning we are 
trying to go into the question: how do I consider life? 
 
Questioner: If I am fragmented I can’t see it as a whole. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s it. Are we fragmente d? Let’s begin with that. 
 
Questioner: Maybe fragmentation is not at the conscious level, as you said, as an 
artist, a scientist, a priest. The fragmentation is in the unconscious. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : First of all be absolutely su re that you have discarded the 
superficial; that you are no longer ca ught in the various religious and 
nationalistic fragmentary approaches to life.  Be quite sure you have discarded all 
that completely; it is one of the most difficult things to do. But let’s go deeper. 
 
Questioner: If these divisions do exist  on the conscious level, isn’t that a 
fragmentation in itself,  to discard them? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We’ll come to that. By going in to the conscious and seeing how 
fragmentary it is, we will naturally come  upon the other. Then  they will come 
together, because we have divided life as the consciou s and the unconscious, the 
hidden and the open . That is the psychoanalytical , the psychological point of 
view. To me personally that does not exist. I don’t divide into conscious and 
unconscious. But apparen tly for most of us th ere is this division. 
Now, how are you going to examine the unconscious? You have said there is 
this division between the conscious and the unconscious, and one may be superficially free of the divisions that culture has brought  about. How are you 
going to examine the unconscious  with all its fragmentations? 
 Questioner (1): Hadn’t we better examine whether there is a conscious and an 
unconscious, and find out whether or not they exist?  
 
Questioner (2): What is the definition of the unconscious?  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Apparently the definition of th e unconscious is: it is what we 
don’t know about. We think we know what superficial consciousness is, but we 
don’t know what the unconscious is. Just listen to what that gentleman said: we 
have made this division but is that a fact? 
 
Questioner: If the unconscious is not a fact , after one talk at Saanen we would be 
liberated! 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : There is the conscious and th e unconscious. I don’t say the 
division exists, but that’s what we ha ve taken. Do you kn ow your conscious 
mind—what you think, how you think, why you think? Are you conscious of 
what you are doing and what you are not  doing? You think yo u understand the 
conscious but you may not actually unde rstand it. Which is the fact? Do you 
really know the conscious? Do you know  the content of the conscious mind? 
 
Questioner: Isn’t the conscious mind, what we understand, by definition? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You may understand one thing and you may not understand 
another. You may understand  one part of the conten t of the conscious and 
another part you may not know  anything about at all. So  do you know the content 
of your conscious mind? 
 
Questioner: If we knew it there woul dn’t be this chao s in the world. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course, naturally. 
 
Questioner: But we don’t know it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s my point. We think  we know it. We think we know the 
operations of the conscious mind, because there is a set of habits: going to the 
office, doing this and that. And we th ink we understand the content of the 
superficial mind. But I question it, and I also question very much whether the unconscious can ever be investigated by the cons cious. If I don’t know the 
content of the conscious mind, how ca n I examine the unco nscious with its 
content? So there must be a diffe rent approach to it altogether. 
 
Questioner (1): How do we know the unconscious exists?  
 
Questioner (2): By its manifestations.  
 KRISHNAMURTI : You say, “By its manifestations .” That is, cons ciously you may 
be doing something, but unconsciously th e motive may be entirely different from 
the conscious urge. 
 
Questioner: Negative action. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course. Please let us try to understand each other. If the 
content of the conscious ca nnot be known completely, how can that conscious, 
which is superficial, which does not know itself, ex amine the unconscious with 
all its hidden content? No w you have only one means of  examination, which is: 
to look at the unconscious consciously . Please see the importance of this. 
 
Questioner: Isn’t it true that for any inwa rd conscious manifest ation there is also 
a parallel outward manifestation? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Obviously. Can we put it this way: do I know  the content of my 
consciousness? Am I aware of it, do I understand it, have I observed without 
prejudice, without any kind of formula? 
 
Questioner: I think the problem is deep er. What you know, what you are aware 
of, that is your conscious; everything you are not aware of, don’t know about, 
that is your unconscious. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I understand; that is what he said just now. Please give a few 
minutes thought to what somebody else ha s said, which is: if  I don’t know the 
content of my superficial consciousness,  can that consciousness, which is not 
complete in the understanding of its superficiality, examin e the unconscious? 
That is what you are doing now, aren ’t you? You are trying to observe the 
unconscious consciously. No? 
 
Questioner (1): This is impossible. We cannot do it.  
 
Questioner (2): There is no frontier between consciousness and the unconscious.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Therefore what will you do? Don’ t indulge in th eories. Look, I 
have been brought up with a highly tr aditional Brahmanical background; the 
tradition of it is ruthless. Fr om morning until ni ght you are told what to do, what 
not to do, what to th ink. From the moment  you are born you ar e conditioned. It is 
done consciously every day, by the Te mple, by the mother, by the father, by the 
environment, by the culture, which is Brahmanic. Then you move to another 
conditioning, and again to another cond itioning. There is conditioning after 
conditioning. All this is laid  upon you by society, by ci vilization, by accident, or 
by intention. Now, how are you going to  divide this and that?—they are all 
interrelated. I may reject the Brahmanical tradition very quickly, or I may not, or 
I may think I have done it, yet still be ca ught in it. How am I to understand this 
whole content? Questioner: I am that content. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course, consciousness is its content! Please see that. My 
consciousness is made up of the Br ahmanical tradition, the theosophical 
tradition, the World Teacher—all that; the content of all this consciousness is 
that. Now can I look at this whole conten t as one, or do I have to look at it 
fragmentarily? Wait, see the difficulty first.  Is there a content so deep down that I 
don’t know it? Can I forever only know the superficial  content? That is the 
problem. Now how am I to uncondition the mind which has such a content? 
 
Questioner: You said that you were taking the example of a Brahmanical 
conditioning, which is still looking at it fr agmentarily. But your  relationship with 
a father, or a mother, or with some body who was awfully nervous, or who 
frustrated you—this would be even more  important. If you ask, “How do I 
uncondition the mi nd, or how do I uncondition myself ”, I would say: how do I 
change? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is the same thing, Sir. 
 
Questioner: For instance, I believe that first you must become what you are. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What are you? You are all that  conditioning. Are you aware of 
all your conditioning? Before  we talk about change, first we must ask: am I 
aware of my conditioning? Not only superficially but in the deep down layers. As 
the gentleman pointed out, I may be ca ught in a Christian, Communist, or 
Brahmanical tradition; but also I have liv ed in a family wh ere the mother may 
have been brutal or nervous. Fortunately in the family in which this person grew 
up, there were thirteen children and nobody cared! 
 
Questioner: I have the feeling that I am unconditioning myself by listening to 
you. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s it, just listen, that is what I want to get at. Let’s move! 
 
Questioner: Attention must uncondition the mind. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, Madam. That is speculation. Just let us follow this please. I 
am all my content: the content is my c onsciousness, the cont ent is experience, 
knowledge, tradition, upbringing, the ner vous father, the brutal or the nagging 
mother. All that is the cont ent which is “me”. Now am I aware of this content? 
Don’t shrug your shoulders and say “I do n’t know”; otherwise you can’t move 
forwards. If you are not aware—I am afra id you are not, if I may point out—then 
how do we proceed? 
 
Questioner: The mind is awar e that it is conditioned. It sees the conditioning. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : I understand. Look, I can see pa rt of my conditioning; I can see 
I am conditioned as a Communist or a Musl im, but there are other parts of this. 
Can I investigate consciously the vari ous fragments which compose the “me”, 
the content of my consciousness? Ca n I consciously look at all this? 
 
Questioner: But we are not separate from it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I understand. How am I to look at the various contents of my 
consciousness? Or is that a totally wrong process? 
 
Questioner: It must be. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We are going to find out, don’t say, “It must be.” 
 
Questioner: I don’t see how one can envisage  all of these parts. It seems that if 
one can hold oneself to what one is seei ng actually around on e in the foreground 
of one’s sight, without judgm ent or preconception as to how one should look at 
it, then one begins to se e even the subconscious. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I understand. But you have no t yet answered my question, 
which is: can you look at the content of your consci ousness?—you being part of 
that content. If you cannot know the cont ent of your consciousness, how can you 
say, “I am right”, or “I am wrong”, “I loathe this or that”, “This is good”, or 
“That is bad”, “The hippies are nice”, “T he hippies are not nice”? You are not in 
a position to judge at all. So, ca n you know the content of your own 
consciousness? 
 
Questioner: What is aware of the cond itioning? That is th e important thing, 
surely. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So let’s go on a little bit. Does  one realize one’s consciousness 
is its content? Do you understand my  statement? The content makes up 
consciousness. So consciousness is not separate from its content; the content is 
consciousness. Is that absolutely clear? Now, what do you do  then? The fact is, 
the content makes up your consciousne ss; being a Communist, a Christian, a 
Buddhist, the influence of the father, th e mother, the pressures of civilization, 
whatever it is, all that is the content. Do you say, “That is a fact”? Begin with that. Keep to it. Th en what do you do? 
 
Questioner: I see that the usual process of my trying to act on what I see, is in 
itself a fragmentation; and when that is s een clearly, I stop acting on what I see. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, you are missing my point. 
 
Questioner: We cannot do anything—there is nothing to be done. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Wait: don’t move from there. 
 
Questioner: This process must lead to the world order. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s just it. The world order, or  disorder, is the content of my 
consciousness, which is in disorder. Ther efore I said, “I am the world, the world 
is me.” The “me” is made up of all the diffe rent parts of the content, and so is the 
world. The fact is, the co ntent of my consciousness is consciousness. How do I 
proceed from there to unravel the vari ous contents, examin e them, throw out 
some, keep some. Who is th e entity that is examining?  That entity, which seems 
separate, is part of my consciousness, wh ich is the result of th e culture in which I 
have been brought up. The s econd fact is: if there is  an entity wh ich examines 
each fragment of that content, then that ex aminer is part of the content, and that 
examiner has separated himself from the content for various psychological 
reasons of security, safety, protection; a nd also it is part of the culture. So on 
examination I find that I am playing a tr ick, I am deceiving myself. Do you see 
this? 
The division as the examiner, as th e observer, separating himself from the 
content, analysing, rejecting or keeping—a ll that is also the re sult of the content. 
Do I see this very clearly? If I do, then what is actio n? I am faced with this 
problem. I am tremendously conditioned, and part of this conditioning is the 
desire to be secure. A child needs to be secure; the brain need s to be completely 
secure so as to function h ealthily. But that brain, wan ting to be secure, may find 
security in some neurotic belief or in  some neurotic action. So it has found 
security in tradition and holds  on to it. And it has fou nd security in this division 
as the observer and the observed, because that  is part of the tradition; because if I 
reject the observer I am lost! 
So I am now faced with the fact th at division as the observer and the 
observed, or whatever movement I make, is part of the content. Are you clear on 
this? Then what is there to  be done? We are not disc ussing the conscious or the 
unconscious, because it is part of this. We say the conscious mind observes at a certain level but there are deeper motives, deeper intentions, deeper vitalities, and 
the whole of that is the content of my consciousness, which is the world 
consciousness. 
So what am I to do? My mind realizes  that it must be free from conditioning, 
otherwise I am a slave to that; I see there will be wars , there will be antagonism, 
there will be division. So the mind, be ing intelligent, says  it must uncondition 
itself at any price. How is this to be done without the division as the analyser and 
the analysed?—know ing the content is  consciousness, and that  any effort I make 
to get out of it is still part of that content. Do you un derstand? Then what is one 
to do, faced with this? 
 
Questioner: Either accept the world as it is, or totally reject it—we can’t accept 
it as it is. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Who are you to accept it? Why sh ould you accept it or reject it? 
It is a fact. There is the s un. Do you accept it or reject  it? It is there! You are 
faced with this and if you reject it, who is the person  who is reje cting it? The 
person is part of that consciousness he is  rejecting; only it is a part that does not 
suit him. And if he accepts, he will accept the part that suits him. 
 
Questioner: But it is even more difficu lt than that; because if you are only 
conditioned to be a Hindu, you might not even know it. To go back to what you 
said before about a neurotic pattern: one may be fixed in a neurotic pattern and 
not know it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s why I am going to show you something, Sir. 
 
Questioner: How can I reject it? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You can’t reject anything. Ther e it is! Now what is the action 
that takes place when you observe  that you can’t do anything? 
 
Questioner: You stop. You feel that all this consciousness is not really it, and you 
might be a monster. And getting the feelin g that you are this, you stop. But the 
process goes on, you can’t help it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. The process goes on only wh en I have not understood the 
content of my consciousness: whether it is neurotic, or not, whether it is 
homosexual or not—the content—all that is  implied. And if I choose one part 
and hold on to it, that is the very essenc e of neurosis. So any action on my part—
which is part of the content of my co nsciousness—cannot be unconditioned; it 
cannot be done that way. 
Then what am I to do? Have you got it? I will not reject or accept it. That is a 
fact. 
 
Questioner: Everything you do only strengthens the division. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Therefore, what do you do? 
 
Questioner: You can’t do anything. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait, you are too quick! You don’t  know what it means not to 
do a thing! 
 
Questioner: May I just say what Freud said: you must bring what is in the 
unconscious into the conscious. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am not interested in what Freud says. 
 
Questioner: I am. KRISHNAMURTI : Why? 
 
Questioner: Because it is a fact. You can see it in nature. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Are you quoting Freud,  or have you observe d it yourself? Is it 
your own experience when you say that the unconscious pops up and acts, or that 
the unconscious prevents action? You are still thinking in terms of division—the 
conscious and the unconscious. I am not  thinking in those terms at all. 
 
Questioner: There isn’t really a division. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But you still say: the unconscious pops up. 
 
Questioner: It’s just a word—like “will”. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh no, when we use the word  “unconscious” we are using it 
with the definite meaning th at there is something whic h is not conscious. To me 
that is a statement of fragmentation. So  if you know that y ou are fragmented that 
way, why do you hold on to it? 
 
Questioner: Our unconscious works! 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course it does. Someone says he is heterosexual; deep down 
he is probably homosexual. We are al ways contradicting ourselves, always 
hypocrites. So I say all this is part of consciousness: tradition, Freud, holding on 
to it, not holding on  to it, dislike of the hippies and liking the squares—it is all 
the same. So I am saying to you, the whole of the content is my consciousness. I will not choose one part, and not the other; not hold on to one part because that 
pleases me, or because I am conditioned that way. 
 
Questioner: But when you say “the re ligious mind”—you talk about that... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am afraid I do. 
 
Questioner: ...you also make a division. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Ah, no, I say when th ere is no division of any kind, not only 
superficially, but in the content of cons ciousness itself, as the observer and the 
observed, when there is nothi ng of that, then there is the quality of the religious 
mind. That has been made very clear. 
Now please just listen. When we sa y the content makes up consciousness—
whether Freudian philosophy, or  your particular experience— everything is 
included in that. The poor man in India ha s never heard of Freud, or Christ, but 
the man who has been brought up with th e mythology of Christ , says: that is a 
fact. And the poor villager with his God, says: that is a fact. Both are the content 
of one’s consciousness. Surely Sir? Questioner: It is not clear. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You see, you refuse to let go of  the particular fragment to which 
you are holding on. This is what I have to fight when I go to India, because for 
centuries they have been brought up with the idea that there is an Atman and 
Brahman, God. And they believe most f undamentally that enlightenment is only 
possible when these two come togeth er. And I say it is nonsense, both are 
invented by thought. 
Now I have come to this point: I see for myself th at any movement within 
that content is still part of the content. I know it completely, it is  as clear as that 
sunshine, it is an absolute  fact. Then I say to myself: now, how is the mind to 
free itself from its conditioning? 
 
Questioner: You will have to go beyond the conditioning. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, to “go beyond” means still being part of it. 
 
Questioner: But you can go beyond yourself when you are listening. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, quite right. 
 
Questioner: Because I feel that you have lost your co nditioning, I am going to 
listen to you, actually listen. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I understand, Sir. You don’t kno w me, please don’t say, “you 
are unconditioned”; you don’t know what it means, so please don’t judge. 
 
Questioner: We don’t want to  get rid of our conditioning. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Keep it and live with it, be in turmoil, be in mi sery, have wars! 
If you like it, hold on to it.  And that is what is happ ening! The Arab  holds on to 
his conditioning and that is why he is fi ghting the Israelis. And the Israelis hold 
on to theirs. That is the world. I have my  particular anchor and I won’t let go. So 
knowing all this, what is the mind to do? 
 
Questioner: I become very qui et. I don’t do anything. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do you follow the statement? He  says: when I am faced with 
this fact that I am wholly conditioned, I become silent. I can play tricks upon 
myself and say I am unconditioning myself —which is part of my training, which 
is part of the content. He says, “I become silent”. Is that so? 
 
Questioner: I can’t help bringing in the “I”. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s just it. He means really that it is a means of saying “I”. 
Now what happens when you are faced w ith something about which you can’t do anything? Until now you have  thought, because of your  conditioning, that you 
could do something, that you could cha nge, that you could ma nipulate, that you 
could alter things; but it is still part of th e same field, moving from one corner of 
the field to another. When you realize that  any movement within that field is a 
conditioned movement, what takes place? When the Arab and the Israeli say: 
look, I am conditioned and you are conditio ned, what takes place? Go on, Sir, 
what takes place? 
 
Questioner: Then it is possible to live. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I realize I am totally conditioned and that any tricks I can play 
upon myself are part of my conditioning . Changing from be ing a Catholic to 
becoming a Hindu, from being a Hindu to  Communism, then back to Zen, and 
from Zen to Krishnamurti and so on ( Laughter )—it is part of my conditioning, it 
is part of this whole content. What happens when I realize this? 
 
Questioner: The process stops itself. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Has it stopped with you? Don’t theorize! 
 
Questioner: It is a fact. It stops by itself. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is much more co mplex than that. You are too quick, you are 
not going with it. You want a result. 
 
Questioner: The mind that sees this, is  not the same mind that started the 
enquiry. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s it. Go slowly, Sir. What  has taken place to a mind that 
started enquiring into its content and has discovered th e extraordinary divisions, 
the contradictions, the fragmentation, the assertions, the aggression, all that; what 
happens to such a mind? 
 
Questioner: It becomes very clear. It wins space, it is in another state. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Then Sir, I will put you a differe nt question. What  is your action 
in daily life—not just in a crisis—when you realize this fact? 
 
Questioner: Maybe we don’t realize this. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s my point. Either you realize this as a fact, and that fact 
fundamentally changes the whole structure of your conscious ness, or you don’t 
realize it. If you don’t realize it—as a pparently you don’t—and merely say, “I 
understand”, it means nothing. When you ar e confronted with this fact, what is 
your action in daily life? Relate the two, then you will get the answer. That is: I 
realize that I am conditioned as a Hindu. I realize that I have been brought up in peculiar circumstances—the world teache r—the devotion, candles, worship, all 
that; facing the world, property, money, position, prestige—and I see all that is 
part of the content, part of  “me”. What is the relationshi p of that perception to my 
daily life? Unless I relate it, it remains ve rbal, theoretical, nonsensical. So I must 
relate it. If you can’t answer  it, then you have not realiz ed it, then you are playing 
with words. 
 
Questioner: It appears to me that every time you ask a question, there is a 
problem of everyone trying to  find the answer. In th e question should be the 
realization that you can’t answer. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course not, Sir. I am asking it because you have to ask that 
question. 
 
Questioner: That’s right. It’s the person who asks the question who always looks 
for the answer. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is what I am saying. Wh ether you are attached to one 
neurosis or another, when you realize all this conditioning , what does that 
realization do to your daily activities? 
 
Questioner: Does all effort on the part of the self cease? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You are going to find out. When you say, “I have understood 
it”, if there is a division between that re alization and your daily action, then there 
is conflict. That conf lict is disorder, in which we live, both the world and you and 
another. So what takes place when there is a real perception of th e truth, like “fire 
burns”, “poison kills”? When yo u realize this fact as vita lly as that, then what is 
your action in that realiz ation in your daily life? 
 
Questioner: This realization keeps me aw are in daily life—that is all that is 
needed. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh no, Madam. It is nothing of the kind. 
 
Questioner: It must totally change my way of living. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Find out, Sir. Of course it does. I am not being patronizing, I am 
just asking you: do you rea lize it, in the sense that when you have toothache there 
is an absolute realization of pain—you do something ab out it? You don’t theorize 
about it, you go to th e nearest drugstore, or to the de ntist, there is action. In the 
same way, when the mind realizes totally that you are conditioned, that your consciousness is its content—and that an y movement you make is still part of 
that consciousness—trying to get out of it, accepting it, or rejecting it, is still part 
of it—then how does the realization of that truth affect your life? The realization of the truth of that fa ct is going to act. You understand? And 
that truth, being highly intelligent,  will act accordi ng to the moment. 
 
Questioner: But can you realize that, when  you are still caught in your fears and 
your desires? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You can’t. You are trying to overcome one fragment which is 
fear, by another fragment. That way you cann ot get rid of it, so there must be a 
different approach to that fragment which you call fear. And the approach is this: 
to do absolutely nothing  about fear. Can you? 
I can’t do anything about the noise of th at train going by, therefore I listen to 
it. I cannot do a thing about the roar of that train. Therefore I don’t put up a 
resistance to it, I listen. There is noise but it does not affect me. In the same way 
when I realize that I am ne urotic, that I am holding on to a particular way of 
belief, a particular way of action, that I am homosexual, or whatever it is, that I 
have tremendous prejudices, I just listen to it totally. I do not resist it, I listen to it 
totally, completely, with my heart. 
We started out by asking if I can look  at the whole movement of life as a 
unitary process. The killing, the refug ees, the war in the Middle East, the 
Catholics, the Protestants, the scientists, the artists, the busin essmen, private life, 
public life, my family, your family—there  is endless division.  This division has 
brought about such disorder in the world an d in myself. Can I look at all this as a 
marvellous single movement? I can’t, th at is a fact. I can’t, because I am 
fragmented in myself. I am conditioned in myself. So my concern then is, not to 
find out how to live a unitary life, but to see if the fra gmentation can come to an 
end. And that fragmentation only comes to  an end when I realize that all my 
consciousness is made up of these fragments. My consciousness is the 
fragmentation. And when I say, “There mu st be integration, it must be brought 
together”, it is still part of that trick I am playing upon myself. So I realize that. I 
realize it as a truth, like fire burns, you can’t  deceive me, it is a fact, and I am left 
with it. And I have to find out how it oper ates in my daily life—not guess, play, 
theorize. Because I have seen the truth of it, that truth is going to act. If I don’t 
see it and pretend I have seen it, then I am going to make a hideous mess of my 
life. 
 
SAANEN  
4 AUGUST 1971 2 
 
 
IS INTELLIGENCE AWAKE?  
 
 
What is the relationship between intelligence and thought? The 
limitations of conditioned thinking. No new movement can take place 
if the “old brain” is constantly in operation. “I have been going 
South, thinking I was going North.” The perception of the limitations 
of the old is the seed of intelligence. Is the “new” recognizable? The 
different dimension can only operate through intelligence. 
 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We were discussing the ques tion of the conscious and the 
unconscious, and the content of consciousn ess. Shall we go on with that, or 
would you like to discuss anot her problem this morning? 
 
Questioner (1): Go on with that.  
 
Questioner (2): I would like to discuss more about the relationship between 
intelligence and thought, and between silence and death.  
 
Questioner (3): I don’t know if we have finis hed with what we discussed 
yesterday, and if we really went to the bottom of the questio n of motivation in 
one’s life. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I wonder if we cannot discuss this question of consciousness 
more deeply by considerin g what is the relationshi p between intelligence and 
thought; and perh aps we can also go into th e problem of silence and its 
relationship to death. But before we go in to that, there are se veral things involved 
in what we were discussing yesterday. I do not know if you have gone deeply 
into it yourself: what you have understood, how much of it is a reality? 
We said yesterday, that most of us  are conditioned by the culture, by the 
environment, by food,  clothes, religion and so on. The conditioning is the content 
of consciousness and consciousness is the conditioning. What relationship has 
thought to that conditioning? Can th ere be intelligence where there is 
conditioning? 
If one has examined and observed oneself objectiv ely, not with any kind of 
condemnation or judgment, one realizes th at one is conditioned superficially and 
in great depth. There is deep conditioning , which may be the result of the family, 
the racial accumulation, the influences  which have not been obvious but 
nevertheless have penetrated very deeply. Is it at all possible for the mind ever to 
be free of all that? When it is cond itioned, can the mind uncondition itself 
totally? Or can the mind prevent itself— not through resistance—from ever being conditioned? There are these two things wh ich we have to examine this morning 
in relation to thought and in telligence, and also with rega rd to silence and death. 
If we can, we shall go into this, cover this whole field. 
Why does the mind ever get conditioned?  Is it so sensitive, so capable of 
being hurt? It is a tender, de licate thing, and in relations hip it gets invariably hurt, 
invariably conditioned. Is it possible for that conditioni ng ever to be washed 
away? One realizes the mind, the brain itself, is conditioned, evolved through 
centuries upon centuries and the brain is the storehouse of memories. You can 
watch it yourself, you don’ t have to read philosophi cal or psychological books—
at least I don’t, though you may. Th e brain which has e volved through time—
which is the past, which is the ac cumulation of memory, experience, 
knowledge—responds instantly to any ch allenge according to its conditioning, 
superficially or in depth.  I think this is clear. 
Now can that response from the past be delayed so that ther e is an interval 
between the challenge and the response?  I am taking a very superficial 
conditioning: one has been br ought up in a particular culture, in a particular 
belief or pattern, and when that is que stioned there is an instant response 
according to the backgr ound of the particular person . You tell me I am a fool. My 
response is immediate, saying, “You are another”, or getting angry with you, or 
this or that. Now when you call me a f ool, can there be an interval, a space, 
before I respond? So that the brain is quiet enough to respond in a different way. 
 
Questioner: Or to observe its own response. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The brain responds all the tim e according to its conditioning, 
according to various forms of stimuli: it is always active. The brain is the 
response of time, of memory; in the brain the whole past is contained. If the brain 
can hold itself and not respond immediatel y, then there is a possibility of a new 
response. 
The brain operates in the old habits es tablished by the cultu re we live in, by 
the past racial inheritance and so on; that responds all the time, to any stimulus—
judging, evaluating, believing, not believi ng, discussing, prot ecting, denying and 
so on. The brain cannot be denied its  past knowledge; it must have that, 
otherwise it can’t function. So I am as king whether that brain—which is the 
old—will allow itself to be quiet so that a new part can operate . When you flatter 
me, the old brain says, “How lovely.” But can the old brain listen to what you say 
and not respond, so that perhaps a ne w movement can take place? That new 
movement can only take pl ace when there is silence, when the machinery is not 
operating in terms of the past. Is that clear—clear in the sense of watching 
yourself, otherwise it is no fun? I am not  explaining this for myself, we are 
working together. 
I find, when one examines one’s activ ities, that the old brain is always 
responding according to its limited know ledge, to its tradition, its racial 
inheritance, and when that is operating nothing new can come about. Now I want 
to find out whether that old brain can be quiet so that a new movement can take 
place. I can do that when I am in rela tionship with anothe r, watching the old brain in operation, and when it understands the truth that it must be quiet in order 
that a new operation can take place. 
The brain is not forcing itself to be quiet. If it is forcing itself to be quiet then 
it is still the operation of the past. In that there is division, there is conflict, there 
is discipline and all the rest of it. But if  the old brain understands, or sees the 
truth—that as long as it is in constant response to any stimulus, it must operate 
along the old lines—if the ol d brain sees the truth of that, then it becomes quiet. 
It is the truth that brings about qui etness—not the intention to be quiet. 
You see, this question is very interes ting because one finds there are certain 
brains that are never conditioned. You may say, how do you know? I only know 
because it has happened to th e speaker. You may believe it, or disbelieve it! Just 
take the fact. 
I am asking why the brain must always function in this old pattern. If it does 
not function in its old pattern, it sets up a new pattern according to its memories 
in opposition to the ol d. We only use a very small pa rt of the brain and that small 
part is the past. There is a part of the brain which has not func tioned at all, which 
is open, empty, new. Do you know anyt hing about it? Don’t agree to this. You 
only know the old brain in ope ration, when you are at all conscious of it. Now I 
am asking whether that  old brain can be still to stim uli, so that a new response 
can come. And the next qu estion is: how can that br ain, which has been so 
conditioned, hold back a little? Can I go on? 
 
Questioner: It is very clear. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And one finds the brain does ho ld back when there is the 
necessity, the urgency, when this questi on is vital—so that a new quality of 
mind, of the brain, which has never been touched, operates. This happens, this is 
not only my experience. Any top-level sc ientist who is free from the desire for 
success, or position, must have asked this questi on, because how does he 
discover new things? If the old brain is in operation all the time it can’t discover 
anything new. So it is only when the ol d brain is quiet that something new is 
seen, and in that quiet state something new is disc overed. This is a fact. 
Now, without forcing the brain, how can  that quietness come and the brain be 
voluntarily quiet? It can discover something new only when it se es the truth that 
the old cannot find anything new and ther efore the old becomes quiet. The truth 
makes it quiet; it does not wish to be quiet.  Is that very clear? Then, can that 
quietness operate all the time?—and the old conditioning w ith its knowledge 
operate only when it is necessary. Have you understood my question? 
 
Questioner: You say, “Operate all th e time”? Will that not bring conflict? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Please listen, Sir. I want to find out, I am enquiring, I am not 
saying, “It must be quiet”. I see the ol d brain must operate, otherwise I can’t 
speak English, drive a car, or recogn ize you. The old brain must operate 
functionally. But, also, as long as it is not quiet, no new thing can be seen. Are 
you following? Audience: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am asking myself: what is the relationship between the new 
quality of the brain, whic h functions in quietness,  and the old? The old is 
thought—right? The old is  the collection of memo ries and any response 
according to these memories is thought. That thought must function, otherwise 
you can’t do anything. 
 
Questioner: Aren’t you making a division? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, it is not a division. It is like a house, it is a whole, but there 
are divisions in it. 
We have discovered two thin gs. That the old brain—we’ll call it that for the 
moment—is the conditioned brain which has accumulated knowledge through 
centuries upon centuries. We are not dividi ng it as the old and the new, we just 
want to convey the meaning that there is this whole structure of the brain, one 
part of which is the old—which doesn’t mean it is separate from the new—it is 
different. Now I am saying to myself: I s ee that if the old brain is in operation 
nothing new can be discovere d. The new can be discovered only when the old is 
quiet. And the old can only be quiet when it sees the truth that the new cannot be 
discovered by the old. Now we  have this fact: the old must naturally be quiet to 
discover something new. 
 
Questioner (1): Is the discovery made by the new or the old?  
 
Questioner (2): By neither of them.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Answer it, Sirs! My brain says , “I really don’t know, I am going 
to find out.” You have asked a question,  which is: does the old brain recognize 
the new, or does the new use the old? 
The old brain is quiet becau se it has understood comple tely that it can never 
discover anything new. We won’t even  use the word “discover”. No new 
movement can take place if the old is cons tantly in operation.  The old sees the 
fact of that and is quiet. And a new m ovement, a new happening takes place. Is 
that happening recognized by the old, or does it open the door for the new to 
utilize it? 
Look Sirs, this is really quite impor tant, even though you don’t follow it, 
because I want to find a totally new way of living. I realize the old way of living 
is terrible, ugly, brutal. I mu st find a new dimension whic h is unrelated to the old. 
Any movement on the part of the old to  discover a different dimension is not 
possible. Realizing this, it becomes qui et. Now what takes place in that 
quietness? Let’s proceed along that way. What takes place when  the old brain has 
understood that it cannot find a new dimension? 
 
Questioner: The unknown? 
 KRISHNAMURTI : No, don’t invent. Unless you experience this, don’t guess. 
 
Questioner: There is space. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now wait a minute. When the old brain is quiet, the gentleman 
says, there is space. Let’s examin e it. What do you mean by space? 
 
Questioner: Emptiness. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Please don’t invent, don’t guess,  observe. Is your old brain 
quiet? 
 
Questioner (1): No. 
 
Questioner (2): If the old brain is quiet , can you ask that question?  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am asking you. It may be a wr ong question, but we must find 
out. 
 
Questioner: The part of the brain which is not used starts operating. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Just listen to what he is sayi ng. When the old brain is quiet, 
perhaps a new part of the brain which ha s not been used comes into operation. 
That is, we are only functioni ng with a very small part of our brain and when that 
small part of the brain is quiet, the rest of the brain may be active. Or, it has been 
active all the time but we don’t know it because that one part which has 
accumulated knowledge, traditi on, time, is always super-active, and therefore we 
don’t know the other part at all; it may have its own activity. Are you following 
this? 
This is really a very interesting questio n. Please give your minds to this a 
little bit; don’t say, “I don’t understand” and just drop it. Apply yourselves! You 
see, having used the old brain so much we have never considered any other part 
of the brain, and what that part is, which may have a quality of a different 
dimension. I say that quality of a differe nt dimension can be discovered when the 
old brain is really quiet. That’s my po int. You follow? When  the old brain is 
completely quiet, not made  quiet, but has naturally understood that it must be 
quiet and therefore is quiet, then we can find out what takes place. 
Now, I am going to investigate—not you—because your old brain is not 
quiet. Would you agree to that? It has not understood the necessity of being 
completely quiet under any stimulus, except of course physical stimuli—that is, 
if you put a pin into  my leg it will re spond. But as nobody is pricking my leg 
with a pin the old brain can be quiet. 
I want to find out what is the quality of the new brain—that quality which the 
old brain cannot recognize. Because the old brain cannot recognize anything 
which it has not experienced, which is not the outcome of memory. Therefore what the old brain recognizes is still the old. Is that clear ? So I am asking: what is the new? The old brain does not know anything about it, therefore it can only 
say: I really don’t know. Let’s proceed from there—do some of you follow this? 
The old brain says, “I can’t touch this an d I really don’t know.” Because I cannot 
touch it, because I cannot recognize it, I am not going to be  deceived by it. I 
know absolutely nothing about the new dimensions of this new brain. When the 
old brain is quiet and incapable of reco gnition, it can only say, “I really don’t 
know.” Can the old brain remain in that state of not knowing? It has said, “All 
my life I have functioned w ith knowledge and recognition.” In functioning that 
way it has said, “I know” in terms of wh at I do not know, of that which I will 
learn, but always within the pattern of  knowing. Now it says, “I really don’t 
know”, because something new is taking place. The new canno t be recognized, 
therefore I have no relationship to  it yet. I am going to find out. 
Now what is the nature of not knowing? Is there fear when there is a state of 
not knowing?—which is death. You foll ow, Sirs? When the old brain actually 
says, “I don’t know”, it has relinquish ed all knowing. It has relinquished 
altogether the intention of knowing, of wanting to know. So there is a field in 
which the old brain cannot function, beca use it does not know. Now what is that 
field? Can it ever be described? It ca n be described only when the old brain 
recognizes and verbalizes it to communicate . So there is a field in which the old 
brain cannot possibly enter; this is not an in vention, this is not a theory, this is a 
fact when the old brain says, “I really don’t know anything about this.” Which 
means there is no intention to learn about  the new. You see the difference, Sirs? 
So now I want to find out non-verba lly, because the moment I use a word I 
am back in the old. Ther efore is there an understanding of something new non-
verbally?—in the sense of not inventing a new word, or intend ing to describe it 
so as to capture it and hold it. So I am  just enquiring, the mind is looking at 
something which it does not know  at all. Is that possible? It has always looked in 
terms of learning about it, resisting it, avoiding it, escaping from it, or 
overcoming it. Now it is doing nothing of the kind. Do you understand? If this is 
not possible you cannot understand the other. 
What is the something which the old brain cannot understand and therefore 
cannot possibly know or acquire  knowledge about? Is there such a thing? Or is it 
just an invention of the old brain want ing something new to happen? If it is the 
old brain wanting something ne w to happen, it is still part  of the old brain. Now I 
have examined it completely , so that the old brain ha s understood its structure 
and nature and therefore is absolutely still, not wantin g to know. That is where 
the difficulty lies. 
Is there something real, not imagined, not invented, which is not a theory? 
Something which the old brain cannot possi bly understand, or recognize, or want 
to understand? Is there anything like that ? For the speaker ther e is—but that has 
no value, he may be deluding  himself. It has value only in the sense that it is for 
you to discover it. So you have to find out  what is the relationship of the new—if 
you see the new—to the old, which must operate in life objectively, sanely, non-
personally, therefore efficiently. Does the old capture the new so that there is a 
different life? Or does the new operate in a way that the old cannot possibly 
recognize, and that operati on is the new way of living? Go slowly, take time, look ! This old brain, with its  consciousness, has lived 
for thousands of years; the consciousness of this old brain is its content. Its 
content may have been acquired superficially  or in depth and that is the old brain 
with all the knowledge, with all the experi ence of centuries of human endeavour, 
of evolution. When it is functioning within that field of consciousness it can 
never discover anything ne w. That is an absolute fact, not a theory. We know 
nothing about freedom, about what love is, what death is; we know nothing 
except jealousy, envy, fear, which are all pa rt of the old content. Then this old 
brain, realizing its utter limitation, becomes quiet, because it has found it has no 
freedom. And because it has found no free dom, a new part of the brain is in 
operation. I don’t know if you see that? 
Look! I have been going South, thinking  I was going North, and suddenly I 
discover that. At the moment of discover y there is a total re version—not of the 
old, it is a complete reversal. The moveme nt is neither to the North nor South, it 
is in a totally different direction. That is , at that moment of discovery there is a 
totally different movement, which is freedom. 
 
Questioner: Could you discuss the differe nce between the intensity to find out, 
and the desire of the old for the new? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The desire of the old for the ne w is still the old; therefore the 
desire for the new, or the experience of the new—call it enlightenment, God, 
what you like—is still part of the old; therefore that’s out. 
 
Questioner (1): Krishnaji, do you realize that  you have been speaking of the 
highest philosophy and that we, here in this tent, are not even able to have the 
smallest relationshi p with each other?  
 
Questioner (2): Who are we?  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We have been through that—we are monkeys! Look, Sir, this is 
not talking of the “highest philosophy”, it is the pure thin g. Do you realize 
actually, not theoretically, th at you have no relationshi p one with another, that 
your relationship with anot her cannot exist as long as the old brain is in 
operation, because the old br ain functions in images, pi ctures, past incidents; 
when the past happenings, images, kn owledge, are strong, then relationship 
comes to an end—obviously. If I have  built an image ab out you—who are my 
wife, or my friend, my girl or whatever  it is—that image, that knowledge, which 
is the past, obviously prevents relations hip. Relationship means direct contact 
immediately in the present, at the same level, with the same  intensity, with the 
same passion. And that passion, that intens ity at the same level, cannot exist if I 
have an image about you and you have an image about me. So it is for you to see 
if you have an image about somebody el se. Obviously you have; therefore apply 
yourself, work  to find out—that is, if you really  want a relationship with another, 
which I doubt. We are all so terribly selfish, enclosed; if you really want a relationship with another, you have to understand this whole structure of the past—which is what we have been doin g. And when that is  gone, you have a 
relationship which is totally new all the time. And that new relationship is love—
not the old, beating the drum! 
Now what is the relationship of that quality, of that dimension which is the 
new, which is not known, which cannot be captured by the old, to my daily life? I 
have discovered that dimens ion, it has happened because I have seen that the old 
brain can never be free and so is incapabl e of finding out what truth is. Therefore 
the old brain says: my whole structure is of time and I function only with regard 
to that which has time—machin ery, language, all the rest of it—so that part will 
be completely still. So what is the relationship between the tw o? Has the old any 
relationship with freedom, love, the un known? If it has relationship with the 
unknown, then it is part of the ol d—you follow? But if  the unknown has 
relationship with the old, then it is quite  a different propositio n. I don’t know if 
you see that? 
My question is: what is the relationship between these two, and who wants 
relationship? Who is demanding this rela tionship? Is the old demanding it? If the 
old demands it, then it is part of the ol d, therefore it has no relationship with the 
other. I don’t know if you see the beauty of this. The old has no relationship with 
freedom, with love, with this  dimension. But that new dimension, love, can have 
a relationship with the old, but not the other way round. Do  you see it, Sirs? 
So the next step then is: what is the action in daily life, when the old has no 
relationship with the new, but the new is establishing relations hip as it moves in 
life? The mind has discovered something ne w. How is the new going to operate 
in the field of the known, in which functi ons the old brain with  all its activities? 
 
Questioner: Would that be where intelligence comes in? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now wait Sir, perhaps you are ri ght. When the old brain sees 
that it can never understand what freedom is ; when it sees that it is incapable of 
discovering something new, that very perception is the seed of intelligence, isn’t 
it? That is intelligence: “I cannot do.” I thought  I could do a lot of things, and I 
can, in a certain direction, but in a to tally new direction I cannot do anything. 
The discovery of that is intelligence, obviously. 
Now what is the relationship of that inte lligence to the other? Is the other part 
of this extraordinary sens e of intelligence? I want to find out what we mean by 
that word “intelligence”; the mind must not be caught by wo rds. Obviously the 
old brain, all these centuries, thought it could have its God, its freedom, it could 
do everything it wanted. And suddenly it discovers that any movement of the old 
brain is still part of the old; therefore in telligence is the understanding that it can 
only function within the field of the known. The discover y of that is intelligence, 
we say. Now what is that  intelligence? What is its relationship to life, to a 
dimension which the old brain does not know? 
You see, intelligence is not personal, is  not the outcome of argument, belief, 
opinion or reason. Intelligence comes in to being when the brain discovers its 
fallibility, when it discovers what it is capa ble of, and what not. Now what is the relationship of that intelligence with this  new dimension? I wo uld rather not use 
the word “relationship”. 
The different dimension can  only operate through inte lligence; if there is not 
that intelligence it cannot operate. So in daily lif e it can only operate where 
intelligence is functioning. Intelligence cannot functio n when the old brain is 
active, when there is any fo rm of belief and adherence to any particular fragment 
of the brain. All that is lack of intelligence. The man who believes in God, the 
man who says, “There is onl y one Saviour”, is not inte lligent. The man who says, 
“I belong to this group”, is not intelligent. When one discovers the limitation of 
the old, the very discovery of that is intelligence, and only wh en that intelligence 
is functioning can the new di mension operate through it . Full stop. Have you got 
it? 
 
Questioner: May I put another question? I don’t completely agree with you. 
What you say about intellig ence applies only to prim ary intelligence. But we 
need also secondary intelligen ce; that is, the ability to in tegrate what is new with 
the old. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is what takes place when there is not intelligence. I won’t 
use the word “integrate”; the new operates when there is that intelligence which 
is not only primary but fundamental. 
 
Questioner: But you see, in your talk to day I always heard the word “primary”. I 
think what you call “new”, is in a cert ain sense primary. If I play a game, 
throwing a coin, I cannot pr edict what will appear and one says one’s game here 
is a random event. I want to know what  you think about the relation of what you 
call “completely new” with what is random in the sense I have explained it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I understand. The professor asks , what is the relationship of 
randomness, of chance, to something totally  new. There are even ts in one’s life 
that appear to happen by chance, events that occur at random. Is that happening new, totally unexpected? Or is it the re sult of unexamined, hidden, unconscious 
events? 
I happen to meet you by chance. Is that chance at all, or has it happened 
because certain unconscious , unknown, events have brought us together? We 
may consider this chance, but it is not chance at all. I meet you, I did not know 
you existed, and in the meeting somethi ng has taken place between us. That may 
be the result of a great many other events  of which we are not conscious, and we 
may then say, “This is a random event, th is is an unexpected  chance, this is 
totally new.” It may not be that. Is there chance in life at all?—a happening 
which has not a cause. Or have all events  in life their basic, deep, causes, which 
we may not know and therefore we say, “Our meeting happens by chance, it is a 
random event.” The cause undergoes a change  when there is an effect. The effect 
becomes a cause. There is th e cause and the effect wh ich becomes the cause of 
the next effect. So cause-effect is a consta nt chain; it is not one cause, one effect, 
it is undergoing constant chan ge. Each cause, each effect , changes the next cause, the next effect. So as this is going on in life, is there anything which is 
unexpected, chance, a random event? What do you say? 
 
Questioner: The very concept of randomness is based on causality. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Causality? I don’t think life works that way. The cause becomes 
effect and the effect becomes cause—you can see this in life. So we can never 
say, “Cause and effect”, there it is! The professor asked about the relationship of 
the unknown—not in the sense of a new dimension—to a chance event. 
 
Questioner: The unknown is outside the world of relativity. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You can discuss it. I know nothi ng about all this, I am talking 
about human relationships, human beings, not mathematical problems and chance events and mathematical order. All that does not seem to affect our daily 
living. Here we are concerned to bring about a change in that daily living—the 
way we behave. And if  our behaviour is based on that  past it still brings conflict 
and misery; that is what we are talking about. 
 
SAANEN  
5 AUGUST 1971 3 
 
 
FEAR  
 
 
The link between pleasure and fear ; the role of thought. Thought 
cannot reduce the uncertain unknown to  terms of knowledge. Need to 
see the structure of fear. Psychologically, tomorrow may not exist. 
What does, “To live wholly in the present” imply? 
 
 
Questioner (1): I would like to discuss fear an d death and their relationship to 
intelligence and thought.  
 
Questioner (2): Could you go into the statement:  the world is me and I am the 
world?  
 
Questioner (3): Could we discuss—but not theo rize—about what happens after 
death if it is actually possibl e to die to things known?  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Fear is a complex problem and we  have to enquire into it, not 
come with any preconceived ideas, but rea lly penetrate into this whole question 
of fear. Now first of all, in enquiring into  this problem, we are not trying to deal 
with it as collective fear, nor are we disc ussing it as group therapy to get rid of 
fear. We are going to find out what fe ar means and what are its nature and 
structure; whether the fear deep down at the very root of our being can be 
understood, and whether the mind can ever be free from fear. How do you 
approach this problem? Have you got any kind of fear—physical or 
psychological? If you have psychological fears—we shall come back to the 
physical fears a little later— how do you deal with them? 
Suppose I am afraid that I shall lose my position, my prestige: I depend on an 
audience, on you, to bolster me up, I depend on you to give me vitality by 
talking. I am afraid, as I grow older, I may become senile. I will be faced with 
nothing and I am afraid. What is this f ear? Or I am afraid that I depend on you—
a man or a woman—and that dependency makes me attached to you, so I am 
afraid to lose you. Or I am afraid because I have do ne something in the past, 
which I regret or am ashamed of, and I don’t  want you to know; so I am afraid of 
your knowing it and I feel guilty. Or I feel terribly anxious about death, about living, about what people say, or don’t sa y, how they look at me. I have a deep 
sense of foreboding, anxiety, a sense of  inferiority. And in this anxiety about 
death, living a life that has no meaning,  I seek assurance from somebody through 
human relationship. Or out of  my anxiety I seek a sense of security in a certain 
belief, a certain ideology,  in God, and so on. 
Also I am afraid that I shan ’t be able to do everything  I want to do in this life. 
I have not the capacity nor the intelligence, but I am tr emendously ambitious to achieve something; so I am frightened of th at too. And of course I am afraid of 
death; and I am afraid of being lonely, of not being loved; so I want to establish a 
relationship with another in which this fea r, this anxiety, this sense of loneliness, 
this separation, does not exist. Also I am afraid of the dark, of the elevator—
innumerable neurotic fears! 
What is this fear? Why are you, why is anybody, afraid? Is it based on not 
wanting to be hurt? Or is it that one wants complete se curity, and not being able 
to find it—this sense of complete safety , of protection, physically, emotionally, 
psychologically—one becomes terribly anxi ous about living?—so there is this 
sense of uncertainty. Now why is there fear? 
One of our major problems is fear, whet her we are aware of it or not, whether 
we run away from it or try to overcome it, try to withstand it, develop courage 
and all the rest of it, ther e is still fear. I am aski ng myself, I am asking you, 
whether the mind is so delicate, so se nsitive, that from childhood on it does not 
want to be hurt. And not wa nting to be hurt one builds a wall. One is very shy, or 
aggressive; before you attack I am ready to  attack you verbally , or with thought. I 
have been hurt so much in my life, everybody hurts me—everybody treads on 
one’s toes—and I don’t want to be hurt.  Is that one of the reasons why fear 
exists? 
You have been hurt, haven’t you? And out of that hurt you do all kinds of 
things. We resist a great deal, we don’t wa nt to be disturbed; out of that feeling 
of hurt we cling to something which we hope will protect us. Therefore we 
become aggressive towards anything that attacks what we are holding on to for 
protection. 
As a human being sitting here, wanting to  resolve this problem of fear, what 
is it that you are frightened of? Is it physic al fear—fear of physical pain? Or a 
psychological fear of danger, of uncertainty , of being hurt again? Or of not being 
able to find total, complete security? Is it fear of bein g dominated, and yet we are 
dominated? So what is it that you are fright ened of? Are you aware of your fear? 
 
Questioner: I fear the unknown. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now listen to that question. Wh y should one be afraid of the 
unknown, when you know  nothing about it? Please enquire into it. 
 
Questioner: I have an image of what has ha ppened to me and there is the fear 
that it might happen again. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But is it the fear of letting go  the known? Or fear of the 
unknown? You understand? Fear of letting go the things I have gathered—my 
property, my wife, my name , my books, my furnitur e, my good looks, my 
capacities—to let go the things that I know,  that I have experienced: is that the 
fear? Or is it fear of the future, the unknown? 
 
Questioner: I find that my fear generally is of what will happen, not of what is 
happening. KRISHNAMURTI : Shall we go into that? 
 
Questioner: It isn’t that one is frighten ed of what might ha ppen tomorrow, but of 
losing one’s own recognitions, one’s satisfactions, today. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Look, the gentleman asked a que stion which was: “I am not 
frightened of yesterday or of today, bu t I am frightened of what might happen 
tomorrow, in the futu re.” Tomorrow may be twenty-four hours away or a year, 
but I am frightened of that. 
 
Questioner: But the future is the result of all the expectations one has because of 
the past. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am frightened of the future, ho w shall I deal with this? Don’t 
explain it to me, I want to find out what to do with this fear. I am frightened what 
might happen: I might get ill, I might lose my job, a dozen things might happen to me, I may go insane, lose all the thi ngs which I have stored up. Now please 
enquire. 
 
Questioner: I think perhaps it is not the future that we fear but rather the 
uncertainty of the future, new events which cannot be predicted. If the future were predictable there would be no fear , we should know what would happen. 
Fear is a sort of defence of the body against something comp letely new, against 
the whole uncertainty of what life is. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : “I am afraid of the future be cause the future is uncertain.” I 
don’t know how to deal with this uncerta inty, with my whole being, therefore I 
am afraid. Fear is an indication of this  uncertainty of the future, is that it? 
 
Questioner: That’s only a part of  it. There are other fears too. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, we are taking one fear; we  will discuss various forms of 
fears presently. The gentleman says, “I am not really frightened of anything 
except of the future. The future is so uncertain, I don’t know how to meet it. I 
haven’t the capacity to understand not only the present, but also the future.” So it is this sense of uncertainty that indica tes fear. Whatever th e explanation be, the 
fact is I am frightened of tomorrow. Now how shall I deal with  it? How shall I be 
free of that fear? 
 
Questioner: Looking at one’s response to the uncertainty of the future it seems it 
might be inadequate. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am frightened of tomorrow, of  what might happen. The whole 
future is uncertain, there might be an atomic war, there might be an ice age—I 
am frightened of all that. Ho w am I to deal with it? Help me, don’t theorize about 
it, don’t give me explanations! Questioner (1): Need uncertainty breed fear? 
 
Questioner (2): We are frightened because we are pretending, playing games, 
and we are afraid of being exposed.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But you are not helping me! Aren ’t you frightened of the future, 
Sir?—stick to this. 
 
Questioner: Yes, perhaps. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now, how are you going to deal with it? 
 
Questioner: By living in the present. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I don’t know what that means. 
 
Questioner (1): For me it has been helpful to rea lize what I have been afraid of 
in the past, and why I have been afraid, and to submit this to  examination. This 
helps me to face the future.  
 
Questioner (2): First of all we have got to un derstand what we mean by the 
future.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s what I am trying to find out. 
 
Questioner: The first thing we have to do is  not to be afraid of being frightened. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh, that is a cliché, that doesn’t help me! 
 
Questioner: One has to realize you can’t he lp me out: fear is always there. One 
has to understand fear is going  to be a life companion. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, you have not fed me. You ha ve given me a lot of words, 
ashes. I am still frightened of tomorrow. 
 
Questioner (1): That is just the problem. You can’t help anyone.  
 
Questioner (2): Can’t you wait for tomorrow and  let things come, see what 
happens?  
 
Questioner (3): I know the necessity for phys ical security, but I want to 
understand my need for psychological security. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : He means that, Sir. He probably has some security physically, 
but psychologically he is frightened of tomorrow. He has got a little bank account, a little house and all th e rest of it, he is not fri ghtened about that; he is 
frightened of what might happen in the future. 
 
Questioner (1): Is it possible to live with your uncertainty?  
 
Questioner (2): If we knew what was going to happen, we should  not be afraid. 
 
Questioner (3): Sitting here I am not afraid, but thinking abou t tomorrow I get 
frightened.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Thought does it. 
 
Questioner: Thought does it. When we are frightened now, it is afact. If we 
accept the fact and if we live totally in the present,  we forget the future. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Right, let’s look. I want to fi nd out what causes this fear of 
tomorrow. What is tomorrow? Why does tomorrow exist at all? You understand? 
I am going to answer it. 
I want to find out how thought aris es, how fear arises. I think about 
tomorrow, and the past has given me a se nse of security; though there may have 
been a great many uncertaintie s in the past, on the whole I have survived. Up to 
now I am fairly safe, but tomorrow is ve ry uncertain and I am  frightened. So I am 
going to find out what causes this fear of tomorrow. The response of my whole 
being to that insecurity of tomorrow being uncertain, is fear. So I want to find out 
why fear arises when I think about the future. Which means, th e future may be all 
right, but my thinking about it makes the uncertainty. I don’t know the future, it 
may be marvellous, or it may be deadly, it may be terrible, or most beautiful, I 
don’t know; thought is not certain about th e future. So thought, which has always 
been seeking certainty, is suddenly faced with this uncertainty. So why does thought create fear? You follow? 
 
Questioner: Because thought divides an d creates a distance between past and 
future, and fear ente rs into this space. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The questioner says, “Thought se parates the future  from the past 
and divides what might be. This separati on of ‘what is’ and ‘what might be’ is 
part of this fear.” If I di d not think about tomorrow, there would be no fear, I 
would not know the future, I would not even care. Because I think about the 
future—the future which I don’t know, the future which is so uncertain—my 
whole response, psychologically as well as physically, is to say, “My God, what 
is going to happen?” So  thought breeds fear. 
 
Questioner: Is thought the only psychologic al function that is able to bring about 
fear? There are some other irrational fu nctions like feeling; that might bring 
about fear as well. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : I am taking that one particular th ing, there are other factors too. 
 
Questioner (1): There is fear of the unknown, fe ar of tomorrow; it is based on 
attachment to a belief, or some formula. The fear can be understood if I see why I 
am attached to a particular convention or belief.  
 
Questioner (2): What about fear of existence?  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : All these are involved, are they not? The attachment to a belief, 
to a formula, to a certain  ideological concept which I have built for myself, all 
these are part of this fear. Now I want to find out by seeing what is fear. 
I said to you earlier I have done somethin g in the past of which I am ashamed, 
or of which I am frightened: I don’t want it to recur. Thinking about what I have 
done in the past breeds fear, doesn’t it? Thinking about what might happen in the 
future also breeds fear. So I see—I ma y be wrong—that thought is responsible 
for the fear, both of the past and of the fu ture. And thought is also responsible for 
fear by projecting an ideal, a belief, and holding on to that  belief and wanting 
certainty out of that belief; it is all the op eration of thought, isn’t it? So I have to 
understand why thought thinks about the future, why thought goes back to some 
event which has brought fear. Why does thought do this? 
 
Questioner: Thought can help  itself by imagining all th e possibilities of terrible 
things that could h appen in the future, so it can make some plans to prevent these 
things happening. It tries to protect itself by imagining. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Thought also helps you to prot ect yourself, through insurance, 
through building a house, avoiding wars; thought cu ltivates fear and also 
protects, doesn’t it? We are talking about thought creating fear, not how it 
protects. I am asking why thought breeds this fear; thought also breeds pleasure, 
doesn’t it?—sexual pleasure, the pleasure of the sunset which happened yesterday and so on. So thought gives a c ontinuity to pleasure and also to fear. 
 
Questioner: Man, seeking pleasure, follo ws the choice of his thoughts by 
discriminating. “This would be good” and  “That would be bad”. And fear seems 
to come directly from what man does to make the goo d things happen and to 
avoid the bad. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Surely the whole process is based on thought, isn’t it? 
 
Questioner: Fear comes from the discriminating aspect of thought. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, but it is still thought, sayi ng, “This is good, this I will keep, 
this reject.” The whole movement of thought is the demand for pleasure and 
discrimination in that, saying, “This will give me pleasure, th at will not.” So the 
whole movement of fear and pleasure, th e demand, and the continuity of both, 
depends on thought, doesn’t it? Questioner: But how can you be free from it? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait, first let’s get this thing going. 
 
Questioner: Thought is fear. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We are going to find out. I am safe  today. I know I am going to 
have my meals, there is a house, there is  a room; but I don’t know what is going 
to happen tomorrow. Yesterda y I had a great deal of pl easure in various forms, 
and I want those pleasures repeated tomorro w. So thought both sustains fear and 
gives a continuity to the pleasure which I had yesterday. 
Then my question is: how am  I going to prevent the co ntinuity of fear, but yet 
let pleasure continue? I want pleasure, want it as much as possible, all the time in 
the future; and also I have had fears, I wa nt to get rid of them and I don’t want 
future fears. So thought is working in both dir ections. Sir, this is your job, not 
mine, look at it! 
 
Questioner: This gives thought a kind of energy. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Thought is energy. 
 
Questioner: This gives though t a different kind of energy. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Go into it, it is both. 
 
Questioner: It is accumulating memories. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The memories that ha ve been pleasurable I hold on to, and the 
memories that have been painful—which are fear—I want to throw out. But I 
don’t see the root of all this is thought. 
 
Questioner (1): Thought seems to resist its term ination—fear and pleasure seem 
to be somewhat similar—but that stat e where thought doesn’t exist eludes me.  
 
Questioner (2): Do what you are doing so totally , that you think about the thing 
that is giving you pleasure while it is hap pening, and don’t thin k about the things 
which may not happen.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Don’t say: not to think about those things which might not 
happen. How am I to prevent my self from thinking about them? 
 
Questioner: Think about what  is happening, rejoice! 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So I force myself to think abou t things that are happening and 
not about things that don’t happen? 
 Questioner: Think about what is happening. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But my mind is always watchi ng what might happen. Doesn’t 
this happen to you? Let’s be quite simple  and honest. We want to think about the 
things that are happening, but thought al so keeps an eye on what might happen. 
And when I am not thinking about this, that pops up! 
 
Questioner: Sir, the feeling “I am” has nothing to do with pleasure and nothing 
to do with fear and thought. I think only “I am”. I don’t have fear. This feeling “I 
am” has nothing at all to do with thought. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : When you say “I am”—what do you mean by those words? 
 
Questioner: The feeling to be present, to be sitting here, and there is no fear in it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is not the problem, Sir. 
 
Questioner: First of all we must find out if certainty exists, then there won’t be 
fear. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : How shall I find out? 
 
Questioner: I see the whole pr ocess of thought as a trap. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Go into it; each person pursue s something else. Let me state 
what I feel the problem is. 
I am frightened of tomorrow because to morrow is uncertain. So far I have 
been fairly certain in my life; though there have been occasions on which I have 
been frightened, somehow I have got over them. But the sense of fear of tomorrow, which is so uncertain—ato mic war, the casual wars that might 
explode into all kinds of horrors, losi ng money—I am in a state of convulsion 
about the future. Now wh at am I to do? I want to be free, if I can, of the fear both 
of the past and the future, of the fears deep down and the superficial fears. 
Don’t give me explanations, “Do this”, “Don’t do that.” I want to find out 
what fear is; whether it is f ear of darkness, of uncertainty , whether it is the fear of 
attachment, holding on to so mething, or to some person  or idea. I want to find 
out what is the root of it,  how to escape from it, not ho w to smother it. I want to 
see the structure of fear. If I can unders tand that, then something else can take 
place. So I am going to investigate what fear is. Le t me go on a little while, may 
I? 
Fear exists for me because I am th inking about tomorrow; despite your 
assurance that tomorrow is perfectly a ll right, I still feel fear. Now why am I 
thinking about tomorrow? Is it because the past has been  so good, has given me a 
great deal of knowledge and this ha s become my security, and I have no 
knowledge about the future? If I could understand the future and reduce that to 
my knowledge, then I would not be fright ened. Can I understand the future as knowledge, as experience, so  that it becomes part of my knowledge, of which I 
shan’t be frightened? 
I see also, that I want a great deal of pleasure, sexual pleasure, the pleasure of 
achieving, fulfilling, of being somebody. I want those pleasures, which I have 
had, repeated. And when I get bored with  them I want wider, deeper pleasures. 
My principle drive is pleasur e—in every direction. So I want to avoid fear and I 
want more pleasure. This is what we all want. Is pleasure separate from fear? Or 
are they the two sides of th e same coin? I must find out, not say “Yes” or “No”, I 
must put my teeth into it and find out whether pleasure does breed fear and 
whether fear is the result of my demand for pleasure. You ha ve understood my 
question? 
 
Questioner: But pleasure could be something else, a learning process. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, that pleasure is also pa inful; but I will overcome that in 
order to have more pleasure. Haven’t you noticed this in your life, how we want 
pleasure? 
 
Questioner: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s all I am talking of. We are demanding, pursuing, 
pleasure; everything is based on this. A nd when that is not fulfilled, I become 
uncertain. So I am asking myself whet her pleasure and fear don’t go together. I 
never question pleasure, I never say, “Shou ld I have so much pleasure?” “Where 
does it lead?” but I want more of it, in heav en, on earth, in my family, in sex—it 
is driving me in everything. And fear is  there also. Look at it please, don’t stick 
to your particular opinion, for G od’s sake move from it! Find out! 
So follow this: I want certainty of tomorrow, and certainty can only exist 
where there is knowledge, when I say, “I  know”. Can I know anything except the 
past? The moment I say “I know” it is al ready the past. When I say “I know my 
wife”, I know her in terms of the past. In  the past there is certainty and in the 
future there is uncertain ty. So I want to draw  the future into the past so that I will 
be completely safe. I see fear arises wher e thought is operating; if I did not think 
about tomorrow there would be no fear. 
 
Questioner: Fear seems to me to be someth ing instinctive. I feel that fear is an 
energy, that some force is there. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You see, each of us ha s an opinion. Each of us is quite sure we 
know how to deal with fear. We explain it, we  give causes, we think we 
understand it, and yet at th e end of it we are frightened. I want to go behind all 
that and find out why fear ex ists at all. Is it the resu lt of thought thinking about 
the future? Because th e future is very uncertain and thought is based on the 
memory of the past. Thought is the response of memory, accumulated as 
knowledge, as centuries of experience, and out of that comes thought. Thought 
says, “Knowledge is my security”. An d now you are telling me to be free of tomorrow, which is uncertain; if I know what tomorrow is, there will be no fear. 
What I am craving for is certainty of k nowledge. I know my past, I know what I 
did ten years or two days ago. I can an alyse it, understand it, live with it; but I 
don’t know tomorrow and therefore not  knowing it makes me afraid. Not 
knowing means: not having knowledge of. Now can though t have knowledge 
about something which it does not know? 
So there is fear. Thought trying to fi nd out the future, an d not knowing what 
its content is, it is afraid. Why is though t thinking of tomorro w, about which it 
knows nothing? It wants certainty, but th ere may be no certainty. Please answer 
my question, not your question. 
 
Questioner: The living system needs to  think about tomo rrow, this is a 
fundamental rule of life: it needs some sort of prediction. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I said that, Sir. 
 
Questioner: We must follow this ru le of life. There are psychological 
disturbances due to imagination which project awful fears, as you say, but it is 
impossible to prevent human beings from  thinking in a logical fashion. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : If I may say so, we did say thought is necessary to protect 
physical survival. That is part of our life,  that is what we are doing all the time. 
 
Questioner: I don’t agree, I think thought is not necessary for survival. Animals 
have the instinct for survival without the fear which is our trouble. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Madam, we are mixing up two things. Please, we tried to 
explain this at the beginning. 
 
Questioner: She’s right; human  thought replaces instinct. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I agree with you. On e must know that to morrow the house will 
be there. Physical survival and planning for the future are esse ntial, aren’t they? 
Without that we can’t survive. 
 
Questioner (1): When you see it all so clearly, fear has no time.  
 
Questioner (2): Thought thinks of living in the present, and must also think of 
tomorrow.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The weather is hot, I must plan to  buy some trousers that will be 
cool. That means planning fo r tomorrow. I have to go to India in the winter. I 
shall plan, which is the future. We are not denying that, on the contrary. What we 
are talking about is the fear of uncertainty. 
 
Questioner: We have no confidence in ourselves. KRISHNAMURTI : That I really don’t understand. Who is “yourself” for you to 
have confidence in? Are you such a marve llous human being to have confidence 
in yourself? 
 
Questioner: Why not? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What is yourself? 
 
Questioner: Humanity. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What is humanity? The good an d the bad, the wars—we have 
been through all that. We are concerne d with fear. We must use thought to 
survive. But to survive, thought has divided th e world as my country, your 
country, my government, your governme nt, my God, your God, my guru and 
your guru: thought has created  this. Though it wants to plan to survive, thought 
has divided the world which destroys itself, of which I am part. So I have to 
understand the nature of tho ught, where it is necessary, a nd where it is diabolical, 
where it is destructive and where it creates fear—that is my problem. 
I said thought must function, otherwise you can’t survive; but in the desire to 
survive it has divided and is therefore de structive. I see thought must function 
clearly, objectively, without any distortion.  So my question is : why does thought 
think about tomorrow? It has to think a bout tomorrow in one direction, but why 
does thought think about the future and breed fear? 
 
Questioner: To be safe. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You see, thought must think about  tomorrow in order to be safe, 
that is clear. And also you see that th ought, thinking abou t tomorrow, creates 
fear. Now why? 
 
Questioner (1): Because we want to continue.  
 
Questioner (2): Because we are tied to pleasure.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We haven’t solved this problem because we refuse to leave our 
particular little opinions, judgments a nd conclusions. Let’s abolish them and 
think anew. 
For me it is very simple. Thought must  create fear because thought cannot 
ever find security in the future. Thought has security  in time; tomorrow has no 
time. Tomorrow exists in th e mind as time, but tomorrow  may not exist at all, 
psychologically. And because of that uncer tainty, thought projects what it wants 
for tomorrow: safety, what I have acquired, what I have achieved, what I possess, 
all that. And that too is completely uncer tain. So can thought be quiet about the 
future? That’s my point. Can thought be qu iet, which means: f unction where it is 
necessary for physical protection; and th erefore no divisions into nationalities, no separate Gods, no warmongers. Let thought  be quiet so that time as tomorrow 
does not exist. 
Therefore I have to understand what it is  to live now. I don’t understand what 
it is to live now, nor have I understood what  it is to live in the past, therefore I 
want to live in the future, which I don’ t know, as I don’t know what the present 
is. So I am asking, can I live completely, wholly, today? I can only do that when 
I have understood the whole machinery and the functioning  of thought, and in the 
very understanding of the reality of thou ght there is silence. And where the mind 
is quiet there is no future, no time. 
 
SAANEN  
7 AUGUST 1971 4 
 
 
FEAR, TIME AND THE IMAGE  
 
 
Chronological and psychological time. The dilemma of knowledge. 
The dilemma of thought and the image . Can one find the root of fear? 
“The mind that can never be hurt.” 
 
 
Questioner (1): You have covered enough ground, co uldn’t we consolidate? I am 
not quite sure in myself about the rela tion between thought and fear; could we 
discuss this some more?  
 
Questioner (2): When thought meets the unknown, it doesn’t know what to do. 
Now if you have thought without time, if th ere is no time, then there is no fear.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Would you like to talk about that? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What is time? I had to be here this morning in spite of the bad 
weather at half past ten and I was. If I di d not come on time, I would keep you all 
waiting. There is time by the watch—yesterday, today and tomorrow. There is 
time to cover a certain distance—between he re and the moon, to go from here to 
Montreux, and so on. There is also time to cover the distance between the image 
of myself—or the image I have projected of myself—and what “I should be”, 
and the distance between what “I am” a nd what “I should like to be”, between 
fear and the ending of fear. We must understand this. 
 
Questioner: Can you give practical  examples as you go along? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am not good at giving practical examples. What I am saying is 
fairly simple. I am not a philosopher, I don’t spin theories. 
So there is time as yesterday, today an d tomorrow; and there is time—at least 
we think there is time—be tween what I am and what  I should be, between the 
fact of fear and the eventual ending of fear. Both are time, aren’t they?—
chronological time, and time as  invented by thought. “I  am this” and “I should 
change to that” and to cover that distance between what I am and what I should be I need time. That also is time. It will take me many days, or many weeks, to 
do certain exercises properly, to loosen up  my muscles—to do that I need time; I 
shall take perhaps three days, or a week: that’s time. 
So when we talk about time, let us be clear what we are talking about. There 
is chronological time, as yesterday, t oday and tomorrow; and there is the time 
which we think is necessary to achieve an ending to fe ar. Time is part of fear, isn’t it? I am afraid of the future—not of what might happen in the future but of 
the idea of the future, the idea of tomorrow. So there is psychological time and 
chronological time. We are not talking about chronological time, time by the 
watch. What we are talking about is, “I am  all right now, but I am afraid of the 
future, of tomorrow.” Let’s call that psychological time. 
Now I am asking, is there such a thing as psychological time at all, or is it 
merely an invention of thought? “I sha ll meet you tomorrow, under a tree, near 
the bridge”—that is chronological time. “I am afraid of tomorrow and I don’t 
know how to meet that f ear of tomorrow”—that is psychological time, isn’t it? 
 
Questioner: How about if I sa y, “Why must this beautifu l thing come to an end?” 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is also psychological time,  isn’t it? I feel a particular 
relationship to something beautiful and I don’t want it to end. There is the idea 
that it might come to an end and I won’t like it to end, and I am afraid of it. So 
that’s one part of the structure of fear. 
The other is, I have known security, ce rtainty, and tomorrow is uncertain and 
I am afraid of that—that is psychologica l time, isn’t it? I ha ve lived a life of 
quasi-security, but tomorrow is dreadfully uncertain and I am frightened of it. 
Then arises my problem: how am I not to be afraid? All that is involved, surely, 
is it not, in psychological time? The know ledge of yesterday, of many thousand 
yesterdays, has given to the brain a certa in sense of security, knowledge being 
experience, remembrance, memories. In the past there has been security for the brain; tomorrow there may be no secu rity at all, I might be killed. 
Knowledge as time gives to the brain a se nse of security. So knowledge is of 
time. But I have no knowledge of tomo rrow, therefore I am afraid. If I had 
knowledge of tomorrow I would not be afra id. So knowledge br eeds fear, and yet 
I must have knowledge. You are following?  I must have know ledge to go from 
here to the station, I must have know ledge to speak English, or French, or 
whatever it is; I must have knowledge to carry out any kind of function. I have 
accumulated knowledge about myself as th e experiencer, and ye t that experiencer 
is frightened of tomo rrow because he does  not know tomorrow. 
 
Questioner: What about repetition? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is the same thing, it is m echanical. After all, knowledge is 
repetitive. I add to it or take away from it, but it’s a machinery of accumulation. 
 
Questioner: What about the people who have terrible tragedies, who have seen 
people slaughtered and tortured? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What has that got to do with what we are talking about? 
 
Questioner: Well, you see, they remain with that fear. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We are talking about the relati onship between thought and fear. Questioner: But even so, pe ople have been telling me ho w their fear remains in 
them and they can’t get rid of it because for them man is a beast. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is the same problem, surely. That is, I have been hurt, by a 
snake or by a human being. Th at hurt has left a deep mark on my brain and I am 
afraid of snakes or of human beings—whi ch is the past. Also I am afraid of 
tomorrow. It is the same problem, isn’t it?—o nly one is in the past, the other is in 
the future. 
 
Questioner: It’s only difficult when you say, “Knowledge of yesterday has given 
security.” Some people find the know ledge of yesterday has given them 
insecurity. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Knowledge gives security and it also gives insecurity, doesn’t 
it? I have been hurt by human beings  in the past—that’ s knowledge. That 
remains deeply rooted and I loathe hum an beings, I am frightened of them. 
 
Questioner: One isn’t speaking of psychological knowledge but of physical torture. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, physical torture which is again in the past. 
 
Questioner: But you know that in the present people go on doing it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You are mixing up two facts. We are talking about fear and its 
relationship to thought. There are physical tortures going on in the world, people 
are extraordinarily brutal and I like to think about it and get terribly excited. I 
feel morally righteous about it and I can’t do anything, can I? Sitting in this tent I can’t do anything about what is happen ing in another place. But I like to get 
neurotically excited about it, and to sa y, “It’s terrible what human beings are 
doing.” No? What can I actually do? Join a group that is going to stop this torture 
of human beings? Make a demonstratio n in front of somebody?—and yet the 
torture will go on. What I am concerned with is how to change the human mind 
so that it will not torture human beings ph ysically or psychologically in any way. 
But if I am neurotic I like to keep on thinking, “How terrible this world is.” 
Now let’s come back. I am afraid of wh at human beings have done to me, or 
to another human being, and that knowle dge is a scar in the brain. That is, 
knowledge of the past not on ly gives certainty but also uncertainty, that I may be 
hurt tomorrow, therefore I am afraid. Now why does the brain retain the memory of that hurt of yesterday? In order to protect itself from future  hurts? Let’s think 
it out. That means, I am always facing th e world with that hurt and therefore I 
have no relationship with an other human bring, because the hurt is so deep. And 
I resist every human relationship because I might get hurt again. Therefore there 
is fear. Knowledge of the past hurt brin gs fear of future hurt. So knowledge 
brings fear—yet I must have knowledge. Knowledge has been accumu lated through time. Scientific, technological 
knowledge, knowledge of a language and so on ne ed time. Knowledge, which is 
the product of time, must exist, otherwise I can’t do anything, I can’t 
communicate with you. But also I see th at knowledge of a past hurt says, “Be 
careful not to be hurt in the future.” So I am afraid of the future. 
So how am I, who have been scarred very  deeply, how am I to be free of that 
and not project that knowledge into the future , saying, “I am afraid of the future.” 
There are two problems involved, aren’t ther e? There is the scar of pain, of hurt, 
and the knowledge of it makes me afraid  of tomorrow. Can the mind be free of 
that scar? Now let’s examine that. 
I am sure most of us have some kind  of psychological scars. Haven’t you?—
of course. We are not talking about the ph ysical scars which affect the brain—we 
can leave that aside for th e moment. There are the psychological scars of hurt. 
How is the mind, the brain, to  be free of them? Must it be free of them? Is not the 
memory of being hurt a protection agains t the future? Verba lly, in many ways 
you have hurt me; there is a memory of it. If I forget that, I come innocently to 
you next morning and you hurt  me again. So what am I to do? Think it out, Sirs, 
go on. 
 
Questioner: Isn’t it important for me to find out why I am psychologically 
capable of being hurt? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is fairly simple. We are very sensitive, there are a dozen 
reasons. I have an image about myself and I don’t want you to hurt that image. I 
think I am a great man, you come along an d put a pin into it and it hurts me. Or I 
feel terribly inferior and I meet you, w ho feel extraordinarily superior, and I get 
hurt. You are clever, I am not—I get hurt. You are beautiful, I am not. The knowledge of being hurt, not only physic ally but psychologically, inwardly, has 
left a mark on the brain as memory. Memo ry is knowledge. Why should I be free 
of that knowledge? If I am free, you are go ing to hurt me again. Therefore that 
knowledge acts as a resistance, as a wa ll. And what happens in relationship 
between human beings when there is  this wall between you and me? 
 
Questioner: We can’t meet. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Exactly. So what do we do? Go on Sir, pursue it! 
 
Questioner: Take away the wall. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But you are going to hurt me. 
 
Questioner: It’s only the image that is hurt. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, Sir. Look, I come to you  quite innocently. The root 
meaning of that word “inn ocent” is that you cannot be hurt. So  I come to you 
open, friendly, and you say something to me which hurts me. Doesn’t this happen to all of you? And what take s place? That leaves a mark—that’s 
knowledge. What is wrong with that knowledge? That knowledge acts as a wall 
between you and me. Of course ! Therefore what shall I do? 
 
Questioner: You’ve got to break through. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : First look at it, don’t say, “Break through”—just look at it. 
You’ve hurt me and the knowledge of that remains. If I have no knowledge of it, 
you will hurt me again; and if I have that knowledge strengthened, it acts as a 
wall between you and me. Therefore between you and me there is no 
relationship. So knowledge of the past prevents a relationship between you and 
me. What shall I do? 
 
Questioner: Examine it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I have examined it, I have taken ten minutes in the examination 
of it and I see that examination, th at analysis is totally useless. 
 
Questioner: Is this where time comes in? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I have taken ten minutes—analysis implied ten minutes—and 
that ten minutes is a waste. 
 
Questioner: If there were no time... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I have used time. Don’t say there is no time. 
 
Questioner: But if there were no time. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I don’t know, that’s a suppositi on. I have taken ten minutes to 
see why I am hurt, to examine the hurt, to  see the necessity of  keeping that hurt 
as knowledge. I have asked myself: if I remove that hurt, won’t you hurt me 
again? And I see, as long as that hurt remains, there is no relationship between 
you and me. All that has taken more than  a quarter of an hour. And I see I have 
achieved nothing at the end of it. So I ha ve found analysis has no value at all. 
What shall I do, having been hurt and remembering that hurt prevents all 
relationship? 
 
Questioner: We have to  accept being hurt. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, I’m neither accepting nor re jecting, I’m looking. I don’t 
accept or reject anything. My question then is, “Why am I hurt?” What is this thing that is being hurt? 
 
Questioner: The knowledge of  being a fool in fact. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, say something that’s ac tual, don’t imagine and then 
verbalize. First find out what it is that is  being hurt. When I say I am hurt because 
you call me a fool, what is it that is being hurt? 
 
Questioner: Your pride. The knowle dge of being a fool is there. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, Madam, it is not only that, please look at it, it is much 
deeper than that. I am hur t because you called me a fool. Why should I be hurt? 
 
Questioner: Because of the image I have of myself. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Which means I have an image of  myself as not being a fool. 
And when you call me a fool, or a blackgu ard, or a whatever it is, I get hurt 
because of my image. Why do  I have an image about my self? As long as I have 
an image about myself I’m going to be hurt. 
 
Questioner: Why do I have to  care about the image t hat the other has of me, 
whatever that be? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The other has an image of me as  a fool, or he has the image of 
me as a great intellect—it’s the same thing, you follow? Now why do I have an 
image about myself? 
 
Questioner: Because I don’t like what I am. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, first why do you have it? B ecause you don’t like yourself as 
you are? What are you? Have you looked at  yourself without an image? Let’s be 
simple. I have an image about you as being very clever, bright, intelligent, 
awake, enlightened—a tremendous image.  And comparing myself with you I am 
dull. Measuring myself against you I find  I am inferior—obviously. That makes 
me feel I am very dull, very stupid, and from that feeling of inferiority, of 
stupidity, I have many other problems. Now why do I compare myself with you 
at all? Is it that we have  been brought up from childhood to comp are? In schools 
we compare, through the giving of mark s, through examinations. The mother 
says, “Be as bright as your elder brothe r.” There is this terrible comparison going 
on all the time throughout life. And if I don’t compare, where am I? Am I dull? I 
don’t know. I have called myself dull in comparing myself with you, who are not 
dull, but if I don’t co mpare, what happens? 
 
Questioner: I become myself. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What is “yourself”? Just see the cycle we go through, repeating 
these things over and over ag ain without understanding th em. So I come back to 
this: why do I have to have an image about myself—good, bad, noble, ignoble, 
ugly or dull. Why do I have an image about anything? 
 Questioner: It’s a means of  conscious acting. A man wh o is conscious and aware 
must automatically become involved in comparison. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, I am asking: why do I co mpare? Comparis on implies not 
only conflict but imita tion, doesn’t it? 
 
Questioner: But surely it is necessary to evaluate. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Watch it please—comparison im plies conflict and imitation, 
doesn’t it? That’s one side of it. In comp aring myself with you I feel I am dull, 
therefore I must struggle to be as clever as you are. There is conflict and I then 
imitate what you are. That’s implied in  comparison: conflict and imitation. But 
also I see I must compare between this cl oth and that cloth, this house and that 
house, measure whether you are tall or short, measure the distance between here 
and another place. You follow? But wh y do I have an image about myself? 
Because if I have an image abou t myself it’s going to be hurt. 
 
Questioner: Perhaps this im age doesn’t exist at all. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s right, go on, investigat e it. Why do I have an image 
about myself as something or nothing? 
 
Questioner: I want to be secure, that  depends on how secure the image is. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You are saying that you are seeking security in an image. Is that 
it? That image has been put together by thought. So you find  security in the 
image which thought has built, and in th at image thought is  seeking security. 
Thought has created an  image because it wants security in that image, so thought 
is seeking security in itsel f. Which is: thought is seeking security in the image 
which it has built, and that image is the product of thought; thought is memory, 
which is the past. So thought has built this image about itself. No? 
 
Questioner: Sir, may I ask wh at to do with education? Because even parents start 
to compare their own children and say, “This child is cleverer.” 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I know. Parents are the mo st dangerous human beings! 
(Laughter) They destroy their children, because they are uneducated. 
So the image is built by th ought and thought is seekin g security; so thought 
has invented an image in which it finds se curity, but it is still thought and thought 
is the response of memory, of yesterday. What has happened? Knowledge of yesterday has created this image. How am I not to be hurt? Not being hurt 
implies not having any kind of image—ob viously. Now, how am I to prevent 
images?—images of the future, of which I am going to be frightened. Thought is 
time, thought is fear of the image of tomorrow in which there is no certainty. How is the mind, or the brai n, not to have images at all and yet not be hurt? The moment it is hurt, it is going to have an  image. And being hurt, it protects itself 
with another image. 
So my question is: apart fro m the physical aspect, wher e it has to protect itself 
against danger, polluted air, wars, etc., where protection is necessary—can the 
brain not be hurt at all? Which means, not to have any kind of image. Not to be 
hurt implies having no resistance. Having no resistance means having no image. 
Not to be hurt means vitality, energy, and that energy is dissipated when I have 
images. That energy is dissipated when I compare myself with you, compare my 
image with your image. That energy is dissipated in conflict, in  trying to become 
your image, which I have projected for my self. That energy is wasted when I am 
imitating the image which I have project ed about you. So the dissipation of 
energy is this factor. And when I am energetic, which can only take place when 
there is attention, I am not hurt. I don’ t know whether you are following all this? 
Let’s understand it differently. 
One observes that one is hurt. One is hurt because basically one has an image 
about oneself. That image ha s been built through the va rious forms of culture, 
education, civilization, tradition, na tionality, economic conditions and social 
injustice. That image is the past and therefore knowledge. T hought—whether it is 
my thought or the collectiv e thought—has imprinted on the brain this sense of 
comparing an image with another image. The mothe r, the schoolteacher, the 
politician does it, as well as the myth ology of the Christians; the whole 
civilization is based on building this image.  And there it is, in the brain, which is 
thought. Now one discovers, one understands, that as long as one has an image, 
there must be hurt. 
 
Questioner: The image is the hurt, isn’t it? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So can the brain be free of all images and therefore never be 
hurt? That means to be free of the knowledge of the past as image. Knowledge of 
the past is essential to sp eak a language; but as long as  there is knowledge as an 
image, put together by thought, whic h is the “me”—which is the greatest 
image—and as long as I have the grea test image in “me”, you have a perfect 
right to put pins into it. And you do! 
So can the brain never be hur t? Sirs, to find this out for yourselves and live a 
life in which the brain is ne ver hurt! Then only can you have relationship. But if 
in the relationship you are hurting me and I am hurting you, it comes to an end. 
And if in that relationship between you a nd me there is hurt and that relationship 
c o m e s  t o  a n  e n d ,  t h e n  I  g o  t o  f i n d  another relationship—divorce you and join 
somebody else. And again there is going to be hurt. We th ink by changing a 
relationship we are going to be completely invulnerable. But all the time we are 
being hurt. 
 
Questioner: If the images are gone, between what is the relationship? Relationship means a relevant word, and if the images are gone, what is the 
relationship between man and wife? 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Why are you asking me? Find ou t if your image has gone, not 
because you want to ask me  a question which I should answer. Find out if the 
images, which you have, have gone; then you will find out what  your relationship 
is with another. But if I say, “It is love”,  it is just a theory. Throw it out, that has 
no meaning. But if you said: “I know I am  hurt, all my life I have been hurt.” 
Don’t you know this?—a series of inward  tears, a series of anxieties. These 
images exist! 
Our question is: can the brain never be hur t at all? And that you have to apply 
yourself to, not just talk about it. Go after it, say, “Have I got an image?” 
Obviously you have, otherwis e you and I wouldn’t be sitting here. And if you 
have an image, examine it, go into it and see the futility of analysis, because that 
prevents you from action. Whereas if you sa y now, “I move with the image”, to 
move with the image means the thought that is build ing this; and thought is 
knowledge. So can the brain be full of knowledge in one direction and have no 
knowledge in the other? Th at means complete silence. You understand, Sir? To 
be completely silent, and out of that silence to us e knowledge. You won’t see 
this. 
 
Questioner: What place is there for est ablished relationship? Is there such a 
thing? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Go to the Registrar and get ma rried. That establishes legally a 
relationship, and what goes on, my God! And what goes on al so not legally! So 
it’s your torture. 
To come back, what is the relationship of thought to fear? We said, thought 
springs from knowledge of the past, knowledge is the past. In that knowledge 
thought has found security: I know my house, I know you, I am this, I am 
conditioned or not conditioned. I have asserted what I am in knowledge. But tomorrow I don’t know, I am afraid of tomorrow. And also I am afraid of the 
knowledge which I have of the past, be cause I see there is also tremendous 
insecurity. If I live in the past, as most of us do, I am already dead and that feeling of living in the past is suffocati ng, and I don’t know how to get rid of it 
and I am frightened of that, as I am fri ghtened of tomorrow. So I am frightened 
of living and I am frightened of dying. Wh at am I to do with the fears I have? Or 
is there only one fear? Apart from the physic al fears and psychosomatic fears, is 
there only one fear, taking different forms? 
 
Questioner: Is it the fear of nothingness, of the void? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is it the fear of not being? The fear of not having any image: the 
being is the image, isn’t it? Let’s appl y our minds and see ac tually whether the 
mind can be free of fear, both of the ph ysical fears and the psychological fears 
which are much deeper, more  neurotic. Let’s apply ourse lves, put our teeth into 
it, because one sees that when there is fe ar of any kind it is the most appalling 
thing. One lives in darkness, in a se nse of void, disassociated, having no 
relationship, everything becomes ugly. Haven’t you fear?—not only of the past, but also of the future; not only the fear s of which one is co nscious, but deep 
down. 
Now when you look at this whole pheno menon of fear, at the various forms 
of fear, physical and psychol ogical, with all their divisions, in all their varieties, 
when you see the whole structure of fea r, what is the root of it all? Unless I 
discover the root of it, I shall go on mani pulating the parts, modifying the parts. 
So I must find the root of it. What do you think is the root of all fears?—not just 
of one particular form of fear. Please don’ t answer me. Be sure for yourself, what 
is the root of it, discover it, unfold it, look at it. 
 
Questioner: Sir, I would like to say that as  an exercise we should hurt each other. 
I would like to hurt you, and you shou ld hurt these people; because of the 
conditions here—I feel the whole atmosphe re is polite—you do n’t want to hurt 
these people. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The gentleman says, this atmosphere is polite, a bore. I don’t 
want to hurt you and you don’t want to hurt me; therefore it’s a form of 
politeness and it doesn’t am ount to anything. Is that so? I don’t mind your 
hurting me. 
 
Questioner (1): I think relationship is not just sitting here and listening to you. I 
think if I hurt you, there would be a relationship between you and me, because 
then I have destroyed part of the image.  
 
Questioner (2): That’s nonsense! Is it possible fo r you to continue, as we have so 
little time?  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You see, Sir, it’s not a reaction, he is telling you something, he 
says, look: we have been through all th is. We have examined the images—you 
having one, I having one, yo u hurting and I hurting, we’v e been through all that; 
it’s not politeness. 
 
Questioner: But you described images and  we did not look into the images. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You were supposed to. How do you know? 
 
Questioner: Maybe the others did. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : How do you know? You see, how do I know that you have not 
washed away your images? It’s my c onceit which says you have not. Who am I 
to tell you whether you have, or not? It’s up to you. So let’s go back. 
I want to find out about fear—not the pa rts of the various fears—but I really 
want to find out the root of it. Is it “not being”?—which is the “becoming”, you 
follow? That is, “I am becoming somethi ng”, “I want to be something”. I have 
been hurt and I want to be free of hur ts. All our life is this process of “becoming”. Aggression is part of this becoming. And the “not  becoming” is an 
immense fear; “not being” is a fear, isn’t it? Is that the root of it? 
 
Questioner: Sir, I try to find out the root of fear. I see I can’t think about the fear, 
so the mind becomes silent so that I can just feel that fear; and then all I feel is a 
deep, inner tension; but I can’t get beyond that point. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But why is one tense about it?  I just want to find out. Why 
should I have any tension about it? Beca use if there is tension I want to go 
beyond it, I am so eager, so greedy! Sir, ju st look. We think, don’t we, each one 
of us, in terms of becoming—becoming enlightened, breaking down the images: 
“You don’t listen to my im age”, “I don’t listen to your image”—you follow? 
This whole process is a form of “beco ming” or “being”. When the “being” is 
threatened—which is “not becoming”—there is fear. Right? 
What is there to become? I can understa nd that I can become healthier, I can 
grow my hair longer, but psychologically , what is there to become? What is 
becoming? Changing im ages? Changing one image for another image?—
obviously. But if I have no image at a ll and I see the reason for not having one 
logically, I also see the truth, that imag es prevent relationship, whether it is the 
hurt image, or a pleasant im age—it is both, obviously. If I have a pleasant image 
about you, you are my friend, if I have an unpleasant image about you, you are 
my enemy. So not to have images at all! Work this out, apply it, not just accept it, 
but actually apply it. Enquire and apply and live it. Then one finds—if you do 
apply, do work at it—there is a mind, there is a brain, that can never be hurt, 
because there is not hing to be hurt. 
 
SAANEN  
8 AUGUST 1971 5 
 
 
INTELLIGENCE AND THE RELIGIOUS LIFE  
 
 
What is a religious life? Relati onship between meditation and the 
quiet mind. Thought as measure; the action of measurement. How can 
the immeasurable be understood? Inte lligence as the relationship 
between the measurable and the immeasurable. The awakening of 
intelligence. Choiceless awareness. Learning, not accumulating 
knowledge. 
 
 
Questioner (1): Can we discuss the observer and the observed an d their relation 
to awareness?  
 
Questioner (2): May we discuss what it really  means to lead a religious life?  
 
Questioner (3): Could we talk about intelligence and meditation?  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now what is a religious life? In talking that over, we shall come 
upon this question of the observer and the observed, intelligence and meditation 
and the rest of it. I don’t know if it inte rests you at all to find out what religion 
means. Not the accepted meaning of that word, the belief in some saviour, in 
some form of God, in some ritual and so  on, which is all propaganda and for me 
has no value whatsoever—that is not a relig ious life. Are you quite sure we all 
see that fact? You may not belong to an y sect or group, or any community that 
believes—or doesn’t believe—in God. That belief—or unbelief—in God is 
another form of fear: the mind wanting so me kind of security, certainty; because 
our life is so uncertain, so confused, so meaningless, we want something to 
believe in. So can we also put aside the hope that something outside, a superior 
agency, exists? To enquire, all th at must obviously be put aside. 
Thought can imagine anythi ng—gods or no gods, ange ls or no angels—it can 
produce every form of neurotic perceptio n, idea and conclusion. Knowing that 
intelligently, man then says: how can thought be quiet, so that the mind is free to 
enquire? Thought is capable of inventing, or imagining every form of conclusion, 
of projecting an image in which the human mind finds security; that security, that 
image, becomes an illusion—the Sa viour, the Brahma, the Atman, the 
experiences you have through various fo rms of discipline an d so on. So the 
problem is: can thought beco me completely still? Some say you can make it still 
only through a system which a teacher has invented through discipline and 
control. Can a system, discipline, confor mity, make the mind really quiet? Or 
doesn’t following a system, practis ing day after day, make the mind 
mechanical?—and being mechanical, th en you can control it like any other machine. But the brain is not quiet, it has been shap ed and conditioned by the 
system which it has practised. Such a brai n, being mechanical, can be controlled 
and thinks such control is quietness, stillness. Obviousl y it is not. Please don’t 
just accept what the speaker is saying. Bu t do we all see the necessity of having a 
completely quiet mind? For when the mind is quiet it  can see and hear much 
more, see things as they ar e—not invent, not imagine. 
So can the mind become completely  still without coercion, without 
compulsion, without discip line?—discipline being will, resistance, suppression, 
conformity, fitting into a pre-established pattern. If you do that, you are forcing 
the mind through conflict to conform to the pattern established by the system. So 
discipline in the ordinary se nse of the word is out. Th e word discipline means to 
learn; not to conform, not to suppress, not to control, but to learn. 
Can the whole structure of the brain an d the mind be comple tely quiet without 
any form of distortion by w ill, by desire, by thought?  That is the problem and 
knowing it, people have said, “It is not  possible.” Therefore they went in the 
other direction, used cont rol, and discipline, did all kinds of tricks. In Zen 
meditation they sit, paying attention, wa tching, and if they go to sleep they are 
struck to keep awake. This kind of tremendous discipline is mechanical and 
therefore controllable; it is done in the hope of achieving an experience which 
will be true. 
In his search for some super-transce ndental experience man has said: the 
mind must be absolutely quiet to receive something which it has never 
experienced before; he has never tasted the smell, the quality of it, therefore the 
mind must be still. And they have said there is only one way of ma king the mind 
still: to force it. When there is the operation of will in bringing about a quiet 
mind, there is distortion. A mind which is distorted cannot possibly see “what 
is”. Are we doing this?—that is, not ex ercising will, not forcing the mind to be 
mechanical through any form  of discipline or system, in which are included all 
the tricks of Yoga—which is totally wrong. Those people who teach physical 
exercises make it into a perfect racket. 
So seeing all that, can the mind become  completely still?—the mind and the 
brain, because it is very important that th e brain be completely quiet. The brain, 
which is the result of time, with all its  knowledge, experience and so on, is 
always active to every stimulus, responding to every impression, to every influence, and can that brain also be quiet? 
 
Questioner: Why should it be quiet? It has a lot of different functions. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It must be active within the fi eld of knowledge, because that is 
its function. If I did not know that a c obra was a most poisonous snake I would 
play with it and get killed. The knowledge that it is pois onous is self-protection, 
therefore knowledge must ex ist—technologically, in ev ery way. That knowledge 
has been acquired, but we are not interferi ng with it, we don’t say, “You must not 
have knowledge”, on the contrary, you must  have knowledge of the world, of the 
facts. But that knowledge has to be used impersonally. So the brain has to be quiet; if it ma kes any movement, its movement will be 
in the direction of security, because it can only function in security, whether that 
security be neurotic, rational,  or irrational. The brain ha s to have that quality of 
sensitivity so that it can function in knowledge, fully , completely, efficiently, 
sanely, healthily, and not from the point of view of “My country”, “For my 
people”, “For my family”, “For me”. But also there must be that quality of 
sensitivity which makes the brain completely quiet—tha t is the problem. I have 
explained, described the problem, but it ha s nothing whatsoever to do with the 
fact. The fact is whether you, listening to this, have put aside every form of 
organized belief, every form of wanting more and more experience. Because if 
you are desirous of wanting more experi ence, then the desire is in operation, 
which is will. 
So the fact is, if you are interested in pursuing a religious life, you have to do 
this, which means leading a really serious life—no drugs, all that is out. And also 
there must be no seeking or demandi ng experience. Beca use when you are 
seeking experience—transcendental, or whatever you like to  call it—you are 
seeking because you are bored with the da ily experiences of lif e and you want to 
have an experience which is beyond this. And when you ar e experiencing what 
one calls a transcendental, or a different le vel of experience, in that there is the 
experiencer and the experien ced; there is the observer who is experiencing and 
the observed which is the experience. So there is division, there is conflict: you want more and more experience. That also  must be completely  set aside, because 
when you are enquiring, experience has no place. 
One sees clearly that it is  absolutely necessary that the brain, the mind, the 
whole system, the organism, must be quiet. As you can see, if you want to listen 
to something like music, your body, your mind is still—you are listening. And if 
you are listening to somebody who is ta lking, your body becomes quiet. When 
you want to understand something, the mind, the brain, the body, the whole 
organism, become quiet na turally. Look how you are a ll sitting quietly! You are 
not forcing yourself to sit quietly, beca use you are interested to find out. That 
very interest is the flame that make s the mind, the brain, the body, quiet. 
Now what relationship has meditation to  a quiet mind? The word meditation 
means to measure: that is the root me aning of it. Thought alone can measure, 
thought is measurement. Please, this is important to understand. One really should not use the wo rd “meditation” at all. Thought is based on measure, and 
the cultivation of thought is the action of measurement—technologically and in 
life. Without measurement there could be no modern civilization. To go to the 
moon you must have the infinite capacity to measure. 
Although measurement is essential, is obviously necessary, how can 
thought—which is measurable, which is measure—not enter? Let us put it round 
the other way. When there is this abso lute quietness of the mind, of the whole 
organism, including the brain, measurem ent as thought ceases. Then one can 
enquire if there is such a thing as the immeasurable. The measurable is thought, and as long as thought is functioning the immeasurable cannot be understood. 
Therefore it has been said: control, beat down thought. And the whole Asiatic world went into the immeasurable, negl ecting the measurable. You are following 
this? 
Still using the word “meditation”, what re lationship has that to a very still 
mind? Can thought be really quiet, whic h means for the body , the mind and the 
heart to be in complete harmony?—y et seeing the truth that thought is 
measurable and that all the knowledge which thought has produced is essential. 
And also seeing the truth that though t, which is measurable, can never 
understand the immeasurable. 
So if one has gone as far as that, then what relations hip has this quality of the 
immeasurable with daily life? Are you a ll asleep? Are you all being mesmerized 
by the speaker? 
We know thought is measure, we know a ll the mischief that thought has done 
in human life, the misery , the confusion, the division between people. “You 
believe and I don’t believe,” “Your God is not my God”: thought has brought 
about havoc in the world. Th ought is also knowledge, so  thought is necessary. To 
see the truth of that, and th at thought can never inves tigate the immeasurable, is 
to see that thought can never experience it as an experiencer and the experienced. 
So when thought is absolute ly quiet, then there is a state, or a dimension, in 
which the immeasurable has its own move ment. Now what relationship has that 
to daily life? Because if it has no relatio nship, then I shall live a life very 
carefully measuring my morality, my activ ity, according to the measurement of 
thought, but it will be very limited. 
So what is the relations hip of the unknown to the known? What is the 
relationship between the measurable and that which is not measurable? There 
must be a liaison: and that is intelligen ce. Intelligence has nothi ng whatsoever to 
do with thought. You may be very cleve r, very good at arguing, very learned. 
You may have experienced, lived a tremen dous life, been all over the world, 
investigating, searching, looking, ac cumulating a great deal of knowledge, 
practised Zen or Hindu meditation. But a ll that has nothing whatsoever to do 
with intelligence. Inte lligence comes into being when the mind, the heart, and the 
body are really harmonious. 
Therefore—follow this, Sirs—the body mu st be highly sensitive. Not gross, 
not overindulging in eating, drinking, sex, and all the rest that makes the body 
coarse, dull, heavy. You have  to understand all that. The very seeing the fact of 
that makes you eat less, gives the body  its own intelligence. If there is an 
awareness of the body, whic h is not being forced, th en the body be comes very, 
very sensitive, like a beautiful  instrument. The same with  the heart; that is, it is 
never hurt and can never hurt  another. Not to hurt and not to be hurt, that is the 
innocency of the heart. A mind which has no fe ar, which demands no pleasure—
not that you cannot enjoy the beauty of lif e, the beauty of trees, of a beautiful 
face, looking at children, at the flow of water, at the mountains and the green 
pastures—there is great delight in that. But that delight, when pursued by 
thought, becomes pleasure. 
The mind has to be empty to see clea rly. So the relationship between the 
immeasurable, the unknown and the known, is this intelligence, which has nothing whatsoever to do with Buddhism, with Zen, with me or with you; it has absolutely nothing to do with author ity or tradition. Have you got that 
intelligence? That is the only  point that matters. That intelligence will operate in 
this world morally. Morality th en is order, which is virtue. Not the virtue or the 
morality of society, whic h is totally immoral. 
So that intelligence brings about order, which is virtue , a thing that is living, 
that is not mechanical. Therefore you can never practise being good, you can 
never practise trying to become humble.  When there is th at intelligence, it 
naturally brings about order and the beauty of order. This is a religious life, not 
all the fooling around with it. 
Listening to the speaker have you understood this?—not verbally or 
intellectually, but actually seen the truth of this? If you see the truth of it, it will 
act. If you see the truth that a snake is dangerous, you act. If you see the danger 
of a precipice, the fact, the truth of it, yo u act. If you see the truth of arsenic, of 
poison, you act. So do you see this, or do you still live in the world of ideas? If you live in the world of ideas, of conclusi ons, then that’s not truth, that’s just a 
projection of thought. 
So that is the real question: listening to this, as you have for the last three 
weeks, in which we have ta lked about all the varietie s of human existence, of 
suffering, pain and pleasure, of sex an d immorality, social injustice, national 
divisions, wars, and all the rest—do you see the truth of this, and therefore is 
there that intelligence which operates?—not “me” opera ting. When you say, “I 
must be myself”, which is the slogan or  the cliché of the modern generation, 
when you examine these word s, “I must be myself”, what is myself? A lot of 
words, a lot of conclusions, traditions, r eactions, memories, a bundle of the past; 
and yet you say, “I want to be myself”, which is too childish. 
So having listened to all this, is there the awakening of that intelligence? And 
if there is that awakening of intelligence, then it will ope rate, then you don’t have 
to say, “What am I to do?” Perhaps th ere have been a thousand persons here 
during these three weeks who have listened.  If they really liv e that, do you know 
what is going to happen? We  should change the world. We shall be the salt of the 
earth. 
 
Questioner: Do I understand correctly, that  for thought to cease the mind has to 
see deeply the truth of the poison of s eeking security? Is that what you said? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Partly, Sir. 
 
Questioner: The difficulty seems to be, that  this part doesn’t see, so the mind 
doesn’t see it, and in order for the mind to  see something there has to be quiet—it 
seems like a vicious circle. The diffic ulty is that it has not seen it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, Sir. First of all, why should a mind be quiet, why shouldn’t 
it go on chattering? When the mind is chattering, you can’t see anything very 
clearly, can you? You can’ t listen to anybody clearly.  If you are looking at a 
mountain, seeing its beauty, your mind natu rally has to be quiet; which means 
you have to give attention to  that moment, to seeing. That’s all. That is, if you listen to the fact that thought is measur e, that thought has divided human beings, 
that thought has brought about wars —if you see the truth of it—not the 
explanation, the justification—you just see the fact of what  thought has done. 
Obviously to see that fact your mind must be  quiet. So it is not a vicious circle at 
all, Sir. 
 
Questioner: May I ask you a question? You often talk about the beauty of the 
mountains and the stillness of the mind when looking at the beauty of a cloud. 
Can the mind be still when look ing at something horrible? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Just listen carefully, observe the dark and the light, the slum and 
the non-slum. Can you watch that? Can th ere be an awareness in which these 
divisions don’t exist? Is there an aw areness in which the division between 
poverty and riches does not exist? Not the fact that there is not the division, with 
all its injustice, immorality, all that—but  an awareness in which this division 
doesn’t exist? That is, can the mind observ e the beauty of the hill and the squalor, 
and not prefer, or incline to  one, opposed to the other?  That means an awareness 
in which choice doesn’t exist. You can do  this. Not that po verty should go on—
you would do something, politically, socially and so on; but the mind could be 
freed from division, from this  classical division betwee n the rich and the poor, 
between beauty and ugline ss, from the opposites and all the rest of it. 
 
Questioner: I should like to ask you, is there a difference for you between thought 
and speculation? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Why should there be a di fference between thought and 
speculation? Who is speculating—isn’t thought speculating? Isn’t thought 
theorizing that there is G od, that there is no God, about how many angels can sit 
on a pinhead, and so on? It is the whole business of thought to speculate—there 
is no difference, it is the same. 
 
Questioner: One can be aware objectively of a tree, of a mountain, of a person. 
Can thought observe its own movement? Is there awareness of itself, and is one 
aware of being aware? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes: is there an awareness of thought watching itself? 
 
Questioner: I don’t like the word “watch”. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : All right: an awareness of itself. Now wait a minute, just look. 
Have you understood the ques tion? You can be aware of the tree, of the hill, of 
your sitting there; there is an awareness of  that. Is there an aw areness that you are 
aware? That you are aware that you are being aware. Please see the question. You can be aware of the tree, the cloud, th e colour of your sh irt, and you can be 
aware objectively. You can also be awar e of how your though t is operating. But 
is there an awareness of being aware? When you are aware of a tree, as an obs erver, is that awareness? The tree is 
there and you are aware of that tree. Yo u then become the observer and that 
becomes the observed, and you say, “That’s not it.” In that there is a division, as 
the observer and the observed. It is the sa me with the cloud, the same with you 
sitting there, and the person sp eaking, sitting on a platform  and observing. In that 
too there is a division. In this too there is the observer watching you, the 
observed; in that there is division. One ca n be aware of thought. I am going step 
by step. Being aware of thought, in that also there is a division; the one who is 
aware separating himself from thought. 
Now you are asking a ques tion, which is: does awaren ess know, or is it aware 
of itself, without an observer? Of course  not, the moment there is no observer, 
there is no awareness of being aware. Ob viously, Sir, that’s the whole point! The 
moment I am aware that I am aware, I’m not aware. Remain with it, Sir, for two 
minutes remain with it! The moment I am aware that I am humble, humility is 
not. The moment I am aware that I am happy, happiness is not. 
So if I am aware that I am aware, then that is not aw areness; in that there is 
division between the observ er and the observed. Now you are asking a question, 
which is: is there an awar eness in which division as the observer and the 
observed comes to an end? Obviously awareness means that—awareness means 
that the observer is not. 
 
Questioner: Can one be aware of the tr ee without the observer, without that 
space? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Look at it. When you look at a tree, there is space between you 
and the tree. Wait Sir, we are going step by step. When you look at that tree, 
there is a distance between you and the tree , there is the space, there is division. 
That division takes place wh en there is the observer who has an image of that 
tree as the oak, or the pine. So the know ledge, the image, separates the observer 
from the observed, from the tree. Please look at it. Can you look at that tree 
without the image? If you look  at that tree without th e image, without saying, 
“That is an oak”, “That is beautiful or no t beautiful”, without lik e or dislike, then 
what takes place? What takes place when  there is no observer, but only the 
observed? Go on, Sir, tell me what ta kes place—I’m not going to tell you! 
 
Questioner (1): There comes about union.  
 
Questioner (2): Oneness.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oneness means the same thing. 
 
Questioner: Awareness. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No don’t invent, don’t speculate. 
 
Questioner: When I am aware of  the tree I have a feeling... KRISHNAMURTI : I’m coming to that, Sir. Please list en to it step by step. I said to 
you: when you look ordinarily at a tree,  there is the division between you and the 
tree. You are the observer and the tree is the observed. That’s a fact. You, with 
your image, with your prejudices, with y our hopes and all the rest of it—that is 
the observer. Therefore as long as that exists as the observer, there must be 
division between you and the tree. When  the observer is not, but only the object, 
what takes place?—don’t imagine, do it! 
 
Questioner (1): There is stillness... thou ght does not work any more.  
 
Questioner (2): We become the tree.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You become the tree—my Go d, I hope not! Become the 
elephant! (Laughter ) Do please listen. Do it. Look  at a tree and see if you can 
look at it without any image. That is fairly easy. But to look  at yourself without 
an image, to look at your self without the ob server, that’s much  more difficult. 
Because what you see is unpleasant or pl easant, you want to change it, you want 
to control it, you want to shape it, you want to do something about it. 
So can you look at yourself without the observer, as you can if you look at the 
tree? Which means to look at  yourself with complete a ttention. When there is 
complete attention there is no image. It is only when your mi nd is thinking, “I 
wish I had a better ‘me’”, or “I am goi ng to do so and so”— then when you are 
looking, there is inattention. 
 
Questioner: Am I wrong if I say that we ar e in a state of awareness all the time? 
It’s thought that invents the division. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh, no! That is another specul ation of thought, that we are 
aware all the time. We are in a state of awareness only at moments, then we go 
off to sleep. The moments wh en we go off to sleep, the moments when we are 
inattentive, that is what is im portant, not when we are aware. 
 
Questioner: Are we aware of the infin ite affection you express when you 
translate intelligence into human life? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It’s up to you, Sir! 
 
Questioner: When I am aware of my image, and my image goes, then isn’t that awareness in itself? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : When I am aware of my image, does the image exist? It doesn’t. 
 
Questioner: Then that is  awareness in itself. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s right, awareness in itself without any choice. Sir, what is 
important in all this, is not what one has heard, but what one is learning. Learning is not accumulation of knowledg e. When you go away from here, you 
will have various ideas about awareness, love, truth, fear and all the rest of it. 
Those very ideas are going to prevent learning. But if  you are aware a little bit, 
then you are learning and th en intelligence can operate th rough learning in daily 
life. 
 
SAANEN  
10 AUGUST 1971  
 
 
 
 
 
 
ENGLAND  
 
IX 
 
Two Talks at Brockwood 
 
 
1  The relationship to awarene ss of thought and the image 
2  The meditative mind and the impossible question 1 
 
 
THE RELATIONSHIP TO AWARENESS  
OF THOUGHT AND THE IMAGE  
 
 
The uses and limitations of thought. Images: the authority of the 
image. “The more sensitive one is, the greater the burden of images.” 
Analysis and images. Psychological order; causes of disorder: 
opinion, comparison, images. Po ssible dissolution of images. 
Formation of images. Attention and inattention. “It is only when the 
mind is inattentive that the image is formed.” Attention and harmony: 
mind, heart, body. 
 
 
I think it would be worthwhile to talk over together  the question of violence, 
which is becoming worse and spreading righ t through the world; this is really a 
part of the whole human conditioning. Can man ever be free either of the 
superficial social conditioning of a par ticular culture, or of  the much deeper 
conditioning, which is the whole collective sorrow, the violence, the destructive 
despairs and their activities of which most of us are unconscious? It is like a cloud which one has inherited, in whic h one lives. Apparently one finds it 
tremendously difficult to free oneself from it all. 
Wherever one goes, all over the world,  one observes that  the superficial 
cultures don’t penetrate very deeply into human consciousness. But the great 
clouds of sorrow—I don’t like to use the word “evil”—that destructive violence, 
the antagonisms and conflicts seem to be deeply rooted in all of us. Can one be 
utterly free of this? If that is essentia l, then how is one to set about it? 
Superficially we may be highly cultured,  polite, slightly i ndifferent, but deep 
down I think most of us are unaware that there is a great inher itance of this vast, 
complex conflict, misery and fear. If one is at all conscious of it one asks: is it 
possible to be entirely free of it, so that  the mind is a totally different kind of 
instrument? I do not know if you have thought about  this at all—or perhaps it 
seems that the superficial conditioning is so important that one is always 
struggling against it. If one has been through that and has put it away, then there are all these deep layers which are for th e most part unconscious. How is one to 
become aware of those? Is it at all po ssible to be completely rid of them? 
Perhaps we could discuss how to be aw are of these terrible things which man 
has inherited or cultivated. Whatever the ex planations be, the fact is that we are 
deeply violent, that we are caught in sorrow. There is this cloud of fear and 
obviously this brings about a great deal of mischief and confusion in action. I 
think that is fairly obvious. How is one to  be aware of all this, and is it possible 
to go beyond it? The organized religions throughout the wo rld have laid down certain rules, 
disciplines, attitudes and beliefs. But have they resolved human suffering and the 
deep-rooted anxieties, guilts and all the rest of it? So we can put aside all 
religious beliefs, hopes and fears. One is aware of what is taking place in the 
world, of the nature of relig ious oganizations with thei r heads, gurus and saviours 
and all their mythology. If one  has set aside all that, because one has understood 
it and seen the futility, the falseness of it and is free of it, then certain facts 
remain: sorrow, violence, fear and great anxiety. 
If I am conscious of all that, how am I to be free of it, so that I have a 
different kind of brain, a different kind of action, a different attitude towards life, 
a different way of living? The more in telligent, enquiring and intellectually 
aware one is of this, the more serious one becomes and there is also the demand 
that the mind must be totally  free of all this mess that  human beings have created 
and carry about with them endlessly. I th ink that is the basic problem; not that 
there is not social injustice and povert y, wars, violence, the division between 
nationalities and so on. All that can be solved, I feel, when human beings really understand this whole problem of existence. Then they can tackle all the confusion and wars from a different dimension. 
The human mind wants  to find that dimension. It has to find it to solve all this 
misery. If you are serious, not playing with  words, speculati ng or indulging in 
theoretical suppositions, ideas  and hypotheses, but are actually confronted not 
only with your own, but with this human  suffering, how are you to end all this? 
The demand for constant security is much more a demand for psychological 
security, which is much de eper than physiological se curity; because we want 
psychological security, to give over all our thoughts and hope to some teacher, to 
some saviour, to some belief. How shall I, knowing all this, understand and be 
free of this constant e ffort, struggle and misery? 
How are we to be aware of all that? What does this awareness or perception 
mean? How do I know that I am in sorrow?—not only I, but every human being in the world, of which I am part; how do I know that there is th is sorrow? Is it a 
verbal recognition or is it an acceptance of  an idea that there is sorrow of which I 
am part? Or is there a conscious awarene ss that sorrow is a fact? When I say to 
myself: there is tremendous sorrow in the world, of wh ich I am part—as I am the 
world and the world is me—that is a fact. It  is not an idea, not a sentiment, not an 
emotional assertion; it is an absolute fact  that I am the world and the world is me. 
Because we have made this world we are responsible for it. A ll my thoughts, my 
activities, my fears, my hopes, are the hopes and fears of the world. There is no division between the world and me. The community is me, the cu lture is me and I 
am that culture; so there is no division.  I don’t know if you see and feel that? 
Knowing that I am the world and that th ere must be a radical revolution in the 
world—not through bombs, that leads nowhere—I realize there must be a 
revolution in the very psyche  and in the mind itself. So that one lives differently, 
thinks differently, acts in a totally diffe rent manner altogether. How am I to free 
the mind that is responsible for all this ?—the mind being thought. It is thought 
that has brought about the division betw een people, the wars, the structure of 
religious belief. And thought has also put together the technology that makes for the convenience of everyday existence: electricity, the railway, the technological 
knowledge that enables one to  go to the moon; it is thou ght that has done all this. 
This thought which has gath ered so much information, so much knowledge, how 
is it to be free from the whole structure and nature of sorrow and fear?—and yet 
function efficiently, with sanity, in the fi eld of knowledge without bringing about 
division and antagonism between man and man. You see the problem? 
How then is thought to pr event this division? Because where there is division 
there is conflict, not only outwardly but  inwardly. Am I making the problem 
clear?—it’s your problem, it’ s the problem of human beings. One sees what 
thought has done, being cunning, extr aordinarily capable, it has gathered 
technological knowledge which cannot po ssibly be put aside; thought must be 
exercised to function at all. And yet thought has brought about violence, and 
thought is not love. So one has to have th e clarity of thought in function, and yet 
be aware that thought does breed all th e misery in the world. How can we be 
aware of the whole implication of tho ught—which is the measurable—and also 
of a dimension in which thought as the meas urable does not exist at all? First, is 
it clear what thought has done  in the world, both benefi cial and destructive? How 
is thought to function efficiently, hea lthily and not create division between 
people? 
The collective memory of man responds as thought—which is the past. It may 
project into the future, but it still has its roots in the past and from there it 
functions. We see that in operation and we say that is necessary. But why does 
thought divide people? Why should I be  conditioned as a Muslim—which is the 
result of thought—and you be conditioned as a Communi st, also as a result of 
thought? Some people think that only violence can produce a sociological 
change, and others say: that is not the way. So thought is always creating 
divisions and where there is division there is conflict. So what is the function of 
thought? 
Knowing that thought can only functio n in the field of knowledge, can 
thought invent or come upon  a different dimension in which there is no division 
created by thought? Personally , I am very interested in this, because I have seen 
all over the world that thought has created  such marvellous things and yet has 
brought about such misery, such confusion,  such an enormous amount of sorrow. 
Can thought completely operate in one direction and be totally silent in another, 
so that it does not create a division? Af ter having put that question to myself—
and I hope you are putting it to yourself—is it possible for thought to say, “I 
won’t go beyond the techno logical world, knowledge and daily existence”, and 
not enter into that dimension in which there is no division? Is it possible for 
thought to separate itsel f like that or are we putting the wrong question 
altogether? Can thought see its own limitations and bring about a different intelligence? If thought sees its own limitati on, is there not a different kind of 
intelligence in operation? Th en is there not an awaken ing of intelligence which is 
above and beyond thought? 
 
Questioner: When thought is seeing its elf, that must not be thinking. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : I don’t know, Sir. 
 
Questioner: Hasn’t thought come up with systems to destroy itself? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : First see our difficulty, don’t let’s find an easy answer, see the 
enormous implications in this. Man has lived by thought. We  exercise thought 
every day, every minute. We must have thought; without it there is no action, you 
can’t live. You can’t destroy thought. To destroy thought implies a thought 
which is superior and says “I must dest roy my lower thought”—it is all within 
the field of thought. This is  what the Indians have done . They have said: thought 
is very limited, there is a superior th ought, the Atman, the Brahman, the thing 
above; keep thought silent and then the other will operate. The very assertion of 
that is thought, isn’t it? Here you say “T he soul”—it is still part of thought. So 
thought has produced this extraordinary world of tech nology, which thought uses 
for the convenience of human beings and fo r their destruction. It is thought that 
has invented the saviours, the myths, th e gods; it is thought that has produced 
violence, that becomes jealous, anxious, fearful. 
So is there a field which is not measurab le by thought? Can that field operate 
within the field of though t, without thought breaking up into fragmentations? If 
thought is operating all the time, then the mind is func tioning with the knowledge 
which is the past. Knowledge is  the past—I can’t have knowledge of tomorrow, 
and knowledge is thought. If the only way to live is always within the field of 
thought, then the mind can never be free and man must always live in sorrow, in 
fear, in division, therefore in conflict. R ealizing that, man has said there must be 
an outside agency—as God—who will help me to overcome all this 
fragmentation of thought. Bu t that God, that Atman—or other forms of hope—is 
still the invention of thought not finding security in this  world, which invents or 
believes or projects an idea which it calls God, which is secu re. I see this. If 
thought is to be th e only field in which human be ings can live, then they are 
doomed. This is not my invention, th is is what is actually going on. 
Have I made the problem clear? The human mind demands freedom from 
guilt, suffering, confusion, of these e ndless wars and viol ence, and thought 
cannot produce freedom. It can invent th e idea of freedom, but that is not 
freedom. So the human mind must find the answer. It can only do that when it 
has understood the nature of thinking and has seen its capacity and has found a 
state of the immeasurable in which thought does not function at all. This is what 
is called meditation. People ha ve done this; but again, th eir meditation is part of 
the furthering of thought. They say “I must sit quietly, my thoughts must be 
controlled.” Knowing the limitation of thought, they say “I must discipline it”, “I 
must hold it in check, not let it wa nder”. They discipline themselves 
tremendously, but they have not got th at other dimension, because thought 
cannot enter into that. 
The really serious people have enquired deeply into this. And yet, thought has 
been their major instrument and therefore they have ne ver solved this problem. 
They have invented things , they have speculated. And poor fools like us accept 
these speculations, the philosophies, the teachers, the whole gamut of it. Obviously there must be a different ki nd of meditation, a different kind of 
perception, that is seeing and not evaluating. To see the operations of thought, all 
its inward and outward movement without gi ving it any direction or forcing it in 
any way, just to observe it completely w ithout any choice, that is a different kind 
of perception. We see, but we always give it a directi on. We say “This must not 
be”, “This should be”, “I shall overcome it”. All that is the old way of responding 
to any action, feeling or idea. But to ob serve without any dire ction, without any 
pressure, without any distortion—is that possible at all? If I can see myself as I 
am without any condemnation or saying “I’ll keep this and I’ll reject that”, then 
perception has a different quality. Then  it becomes a living thing, not the 
repetitive pattern of the past. 
So in the very act of liste ning, as you are doing now, you see the truth that to 
really perceive there must be no directiv e or persuasion or compulsion. In that 
observation, you will see that thought does not enter at all. Which means, in that 
perception, in that seeing, there is comple te attention. Where th ere is no attention 
there is a distortion. Now when you are liste ning to this, if you see the truth of it, 
that acts. 
 
Questioner: Sir, in that state one sees oneself absolutely powerless and also 
amoral, and thought always feels and knows its own power. Thought always enters where there is inte rest, fear and anxiety. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, isn’t fear and anxiety th e result of thought?—thought has 
produced fear! 
 
Questioner: Sometimes it comes unexpectedly. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That may be, but whether it is unexpected or not, it’s thought 
that has produced fear—no? Thought has produced this immense sorrow. 
 
Questioner: What abou t children’s fears? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Surely, isn’t that based on thei r lack of security? Children need 
complete security and the parents cannot give it because they are interested in 
their own little selves. They are quarrelling,  they are ambitious , so they cannot 
give the security the child demands—which is love. 
So we come back to the same question. Thought has produced fear, there is 
no question about it. Thought has produc ed the aching loneliness in oneself, 
thought has said “I must fu lfil, I must be, I am little, I must be big”. Thought has 
brought about jealousy, anxiety, guilt. Thought is that guilt. No t: thought makes 
for guilt, thought is guilt. How can I observe myself and the world, of which I am 
part, without any interference of thought in that observation, so  that out of the 
observation a different action can come which does not produce fear, regrets and 
all the rest of it? So I mu st learn to observe myself and the world and my actions 
quite differently. There must be a learning  of observation in which thought does 
not interfere at all because the moment thought interferes it leads to distortion, it becomes biased. Perception is  in the present; you can’ t perceive tomorrow. You 
perceive now, and when thought interferes in that perception—thought being the 
response of the past—it must distort the present; this is logical. 
 
Questioner: Surely, to be aware we have to think. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait, look at it. What does awareness mean? I am aware that 
you are sitting there and that I am sitting up here, I am aware that I am sitting on 
a chair etc. Then thought says “I am a better pers on than somebody who is sitting 
below, because I am talking”. Thought gi ves me prestige—do you follow? Is that 
awareness, or is it merely  the continuous movement of thought? Can you see a 
tree without the operation of thought, w ithout the image of the tree?—the image 
being thought that says : that is an oak. 
In observing a tree what takes place? There is the space between the observer 
and the tree, there is distan ce; then there is the botan ical knowledge, the like or 
dislike of that tree. I have an image of a tree and that image l ooks at that tree; is 
there a perception without the image? The image is thought; thought is the 
knowledge of that tree. When  there is perception with an image, there is no direct 
perception of the tree. Is it possible to l ook at the tree withou t the image? That is 
fairly simple, but it become s much more complex when I look at myself without 
any image about myself. Can there be an  observation of myself without any 
image? I am full of my images. I am this, I am not that, I should be this, I should 
not be that, I must become, I must no t become—do you follow? Those are all 
images and I am looking at myself with one of the images—not with the whole 
group of images. 
So what is looking? If there is no im age then what is seeing? If I have no 
images at all about myself—w hich one has to go into very deeply—then what is 
there to see? There is absolu tely nothing to see, and one is frightened of that. 
That is: one is absolutely nothing. But we can’t face th at, therefore we have those 
images about ourselves. 
The human mind demands freedom. Free dom is essential, it is even 
demanded politically, but you don’t dema nd freedom from all images. Thought 
has created these images for various so ciological, economic and cultural reasons. 
These images are measurable: the grea ter, the lesser. One asks: can thought 
observe without distortion? Obviously it ca n’t. There is a distorting factor in 
thought, because thought is the response of the past. Is there an observation without the interference of thought?—that means withou t the interference of any 
image. You can find this out; it’s not a question of just accepting or believing. You can look at your wife or your husband, the tree,  the cloud, or the person 
sitting next to you, without any image. 
 
Questioner: Is there such  a thing as an unconsciou s image one might not be 
aware of? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, there is, of course. Please listen to my question: how am I 
to be aware of the many unconscious images that I have stored up? Questioner: Krishnaji, as long  as one is trying to be aw are, one creates things to 
be aware of. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is what I am saying. You cannot try to be aware, you 
cannot determine to be aware; to be aw are is not the result of exercising will. 
Either you see or you don’t see, either you listen to what we are talking about 
now, or you don’t listen. But if you liste n with your image, then of course you 
don’t listen at all. 
The question is really very interesting.  I can understand th e conscious images, 
the superficial knowledge that I have, that is fairly simple and clear. But how am 
I to be aware of the deep, hidden images which have such a powerful influence on the whole way of life? 
 
Questioner: We find out by how we be have, by how these images come up, 
sometimes in sleep. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Which means: through my beha viour I begin to discover the 
unconscious images that ha ve been stored up—one im age after the other, you 
follow? I behave towards you  differently than toward s another, because you are 
more powerful, you have greater prestig e than the other man. Therefore my 
image of you is greater and I despise th e other; so it means going through one 
image after another. Is there a central fact  that creates these images consciously 
as well as deeply? If I can find that out, then I don’t have to go through image 
after image, or discover the images through dreams. 
Through my behaviour I discover my un conscious images; that’s a form of 
analysis, isn’t it? Will analysis resolve these images? These images are created 
by thought, and analysis is thought. Th rough thought I hope to destroy the 
images that thought has creat ed, so I am caught in a vicious circle. How do I deal 
with this? Are your images revealed through dreams? Isn’t that another form of analysis? Why should you dream at all? Dreams are a continuation of my daily 
activity, aren’t they? I lead  rather a confused life—uncertain, miserable, lonely, 
frightened, comparing myself with somebody else who is more beautiful, more 
intelligent; that is my life during the waking  hours and when I sl eep, all that goes 
on. I dream of all the things I have been through; it is the continuation of how I 
have been living during the daytime. If th ere is a revelation of myself through 
dreams, that is a form of analysis. Theref ore I am depending on dreams to reveal 
the hidden images, and th e dependence on dreams ma kes me less and less awake 
during the waking hours—no? 
 
Questioner: Thought and sub-thought crea te images and these are useful on a 
certain level. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We have said that, there are us eful images which must function, 
which we must have, there are highly da ngerous images which one must totally 
abolish—obviously. That is what this whole discussion is about. 
 Questioner: Is there not only one questio n?—not whether thought can be silent 
when necessary but: can there be only silence? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That means, Sir: can there be  silence from which thought can 
operate, doesn’t it? 
 
Questioner: It is not a que stion whether thought can operate or not, but can there 
be only silence? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Can thought be completely sile nt? Who is putting that question? 
Is thought putting that question? 
 
Questioner: Obviously. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So thought is asking itsel f whether it can be quiet. 
How will it find out? Can it do anything to be silent ? It can’t, can it? Can 
thought say to itself: I must be quiet? Th at is not being quiet! Then what is 
silence which is not the product of though t? Is there a silence which is not the 
result of thought? Which means, can t hought come to an end by itself, without 
asking to come to an end? Isn’t that what is implied when you listen to 
something, when you see clearly? When you are completely a ttentive, in that 
attention there is silence, isn’t there?  Complete attention means your body, your 
nerves, everything is atten tive. Then in that atten tion the observer as thought 
does not exist. 
 
Questioner: That only happens in moments of great danger. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You mean to say when  there is a crisis. Must one live in crises 
all the time? What an appalling idea, isn’t it? In order to be quiet I must have a 
series of crises and thereby hope to  be silent. That’s too complicated! 
 
Questioner: May I say that silence happens from within. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : How does it happen? Can one function from silence—you 
follow? Please put that question: first of  all, what is silence? How does it come? 
Is there a functioning, that is living a daily  life out of silence? I can’t assert that 
there is an awareness all the tim e, I don’t know, you don’t know. 
 
Questioner: But it seems to be ther e, it just changes all the time. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We only know one thing: that  thought is perpetually in 
operation. And when thought is in operation there is no silence, there is no 
awareness, as we pointed out. Awareness, or perception, implies a state of seeing 
in which there is no image whatsoever. Un til I find out that it is possible to see 
without any image, I can’t state anything else. I can’t state that there is an awareness, there is a silenc e. Is it possible for me, in daily life, to observe my wife, my child, everything around me, without a shadow of an image? Find out. 
Then out of that attention there is silence. That attention is silence. And it is not 
the result of practice, which is again thought. 
 
BROCKWOOD PARK 
4 SEPTEMBER 1971 2 
 
 
THE MEDITATIVE MIND AND THE  
IMPOSSIBLE QUESTION  
 
 
“Meditation is the total release of energy.” Western world built on 
measurement, which is maya for the East. Schools of meditation 
useless. Energy depends on self-knowledge. Problem of self-
observation. To look “without the eyes of the past”. Naming. The 
hidden in oneself. Drugs. The hidden content and the impossible 
question. “Meditation is a way of pu tting aside altogether everything 
that man has conceived of himself and the world.” A radical revolution in one affects the whole world. What takes place when the 
mind is quiet? “Meditation is ... seeing the measure and going beyond 
the measure.” Harmony and a “totally different life”. 
Questions: Intuition; awareness; awareness and sleep; teacher and 
disciple. 
 
 
As one travels over the world and observ es the appalling conditions of poverty 
and the ugliness of man’s relationship to man, it becomes obvious that there must 
be a total revolution. A different kind of  culture must come into being. The old 
culture is almost dead and yet we are c linging to it. Those who are young revolt 
against it, but unfortunately have not found a way, or a means, of transforming the essential quality of the human being,  which is the mind. Unless there is a 
deep psychological revolutio n, mere reformation on the periphery will have little 
effect. This psychological revolution—wh ich I think is the only revolution—is 
possible through meditation. 
Meditation is the total releas e of energy, and that is wh at we are going to talk 
over together this morning. The root meaning of that word is to measure. The whole Western world is based on the idea of  measurement, but in the East they 
have said, “Measurement is maya, illu sion, therefore one must find the 
immeasurable.” So the two drifted apar t culturally, socially, intellectually and 
religiously. 
Meditation is quite a comple x problem, we have to go into it slowly and 
approach it from different angles, bearing in mind all the time that a psychological revolution is absolutely nece ssary for a different kind of world, a 
different kind of society, to come into being. I do know how strongly you feel about this. Probably most of us, being bourgeois, comfortable with our little 
incomes, our family and so on, would rather remain as we are and not be 
disturbed. But events, techno logy, and all those things that are happening in the 
world, are producing great changes outward ly. Yet inwardly most of us remain more or less as we have been for centuries. That revol ution can only take place at 
the very centre of our being and requires a great abundance of energy; meditation 
is the release of that total energy and we are going to talk that over. 
We have got a great many ideas about wh at meditation is and what it should 
be; we import it from the East, or interp ret it according to our own particular 
religious inclination, as c ontemplation, acceptance, pr ayer, keeping the mind still 
or open—we have all kinds of fanciful ideas about it. And especially lately, 
people have come from India propagating meditations of various forms. 
First of all, how is one to have this  quality of energy  which is without 
friction? We know mechanical energy, which is friction mechanically, and the 
friction in us which produces energy through conflict, through resistance, 
through control and all the rest of it. So there is a kind of energy caused by 
mechanical friction. Is there anothe r kind of energy which has no friction 
whatsoever and is ther efore completely free and immeasurable? I think 
meditation is the discovery of that. Unless one has great abundance of energy, 
not only physically but mu ch more so psychologically, our action will never be 
complete, it will always produce fricti on, conflict and struggle. Seeing the 
various forms of meditation, of Zen, of Yoga brought over from India, and the various contemplative groups of monks and so on, in all that, there is the idea of 
control, acceptance of a system, practisi ng a repetition of words, which is called 
mantra, and various forms of breathing, hatha yoga and so on. I suppose you 
know all this. 
So first of all let us dispose of them altogether by investigating. Not accepting 
what they say, but investigating it, seeing the truth or the falseness of it. There is 
this repetition of words, of sentences, ma ntras, a set of phrases given by a guru, 
being initiated, paying mone y to learn a peculiar phrase to be repeated by you 
secretly. Probably some of you have done that and you know a great deal about 
it. That is called mantra yoga, and is br ought over from India. I don’t know why 
you pay a single penny to repeat certai n words from somebody who says, “If you 
do this you will achieve enlightenment, y ou will have a quiet mind.” When you 
repeat a series of words constantly, whether it is Ave Maria  or various Sanskrit 
words, obviously your mind becomes rather  dull and you have a peculiar sense of 
unity, of quietness, and you think that will help to bring about clarity. You can 
see the absurdity of it, b ecause why should you accept what anybody says about 
these matters—including myself? Why shou ld you accept any authority about the 
inward movement of life? We reject au thority outwardly; if you are at all 
intellectually aware and ob servant politically you re ject these things. But 
apparently we accept the authority of somebody who says, “I know, I have achieved, I have realized.” The man who says he knows, he does not know. The 
moment you say you know, you don’t know. What is it you know? Some 
experience which you have had, some kind of vision, some kind of enlightenment? I dislike to use that word “enlightenment”. Once you have 
experienced that, you think you have attain ed some extraordinary state; but that 
is past, you can only know something wh ich is over and th erefore dead. When 
these people come over and say they have realized, “Do this” or “Do that” for so 
much money, this is obviously ab surd. So we can dispose of that. We can also dispose of this whole id ea of practising a system, a method. 
When you practise a method in order to ac hieve enlightenment, or bliss, or to 
have a quiet mind, or to achieve a stat e of tranquillity, whatever it is, it obviously 
makes the mind mechanical, you repeat over and over again. This not only 
implies suppression of your own move ment and understanding, but also 
conformity and the endless conflict invol ved in practising a particular system. 
The mind likes to conform to a system because then it gets crystallized and it is easy to live that way. So can  we dispose, now, of all systems of meditation? But 
you won’t, because our whole structure of habit is based on that demand to find a method, so that we can just follow and live a monotonous, dull life of routine; not 
to be disturbed, that is what we  want, and so we accept authority. 
One has to find out for oneself, not through anybody. We have had the 
authority of the priest for centuries upo n centuries, the authority of teachers, 
saviours and masters. If you really want to find out what meditation is, you have 
to set aside all authority co mpletely and totally; not the authority of law, of the 
policeman—law, legislation, you may unde rstand later, when yo ur own mind is 
orderly and clear. Now what is meditation? Is it control of thought? And if it is, 
who is the controller of thought? It is thought itself, isn’t it? Our whole culture, 
both in the East and in the West, is  based on control of thought and 
concentration, in which only one thought can be pursue d to the end. Why should 
one control at all? Cont rol implies imitation, conformity, it implies the 
acceptance of a pattern as the authority, acco rding to which you ar e trying to live. 
That pattern is set by the society, by th e culture, by somebody who you think has 
knowledge, enlightenment and so on. According to that pattern one tries to live, 
suppressing all one’s own feelings and idea s, trying to conform. In that there is 
conflict, and conflict is esse ntially a wastage of energy. 
So concentration, which so many advocate in meditation, is totally wrong. 
Are you accepting all this, or are you just  listening out of boredom? Because we 
must go into this question, whether thought can function where necessary, 
without any form of control. Can thought  function when necessary as knowledge, 
in action, and be completely  still at other times? That is the real issue. The mind 
which is cluttered up with so many activities of thought and is therefore 
uncertain, is trying to find clarity in that confusion, forcing itself to control, to 
conform to an idea; it therefore brings about more and more confusion within 
itself. I want to find out whether the mind can be quiet and only function when necessary. 
Control, because it implies conflict, is  a great waste of energy; that is 
important to understand, because I feel me ditation must be a releasing of energy 
in which there is not the slightest friction.  How is a mind to do this? How is it to 
have such energy in which every form of friction comes to an end? In enquiring 
into that, one must understand oneself completely, there mu st be total self-
knowing—not according to any psychologi st, philosopher or teacher, or the 
pattern set by a particular culture—but to know oneself right through, both at the 
conscious level as well as at the deeper levels, is that possible? When there is complete understanding of oneself, then there is the ending of conflict—and that 
is meditation. Now, how am I to know myself? I can onl y know myself in relationship; the 
observation of myself takes place only wh en there is response and reaction in 
relationship; there is no such thing as isol ation. The mind is is olating itself all the 
time in all its activities, build ing a wall round itself in orde r not to be hurt, not to 
have any discomfort, unhappine ss, or trouble; it is isolating itself all the time in 
its self-centred activity. I want to know  “myself” as I want  to know how to get 
from here to a particular town; that is, clearly, watching everything that is 
involved in mysel f, my feelings, my thoughts, my motives, conscious or 
unconscious. How is that possible? The Gr eeks, the Hindus, the Buddhists have 
said: know yourself. But apparently that is one of the most difficult things to do. 
We are going to find out this morning how to  look at oursel ves; because once 
you know yourself completely , that prevents all friction,  and therefore out of that 
comes this quality of energy which is totally different . So to find  out how to 
observe oneself, one must understa nd what is meant by observing. 
When we observe objective th ings like trees, clouds, th e things outside of us, 
there is not only the space between the observer and the observed—the physical space—there is also the space of time. When we look at a tree there is not only 
physical distance, but there is also psyc hological distance. There is the distance 
between you and the tree, the distance created by the image as knowledge: that is 
an oak tree, or an elm. That image between you and the tree separates you. 
But when the quality of the mind of th e observer is without the image, which 
is imagination, then there is quite a di fferent relationship between the observer 
and the observed. Have you ever looked at a tree withou t a single word of like or 
dislike, without a single image? Have you  noticed what then takes place? Then, 
for the first time, you see the tree as it is and you see the beauty of it, the colour, 
the depth, the vitality of it. A tree, or even another person, is fairly easy to 
observe; but to observe oneself  that way—that is to  observe without the 
observer—is much more difficult. So one must find out who is the observer. 
I want to watch myself, I want to know myself as deeply as possible. What is 
the nature, the structure of that observer who is watching? That observer is the 
past, isn’t it?—the past knowledge which he  has collected and st ored up; the past 
being the culture, the conditioni ng. That is the observer who says, “This is right, 
this is wrong, this must be, this must not  be, this is good, this is bad.” So the 
observer is the past and with those eyes of  the past we try to see what we are. 
Then we say, “I don’t like this, I am ugly”, or “This I will keep”. All these discriminations and condemna tions take place. Can I look at myself without the 
eyes of the past? Can I watch myself in action, which is in relationship, without 
any movement of the past? Have you ever tried this? (I don’t suppose you have.) 
When there is no observer then there is only the ob served. Please see this: I 
am envious, or I overeat, I am greedy. The normal reaction is, “I must not overeat”, “I must not be gr eedy”, “I must suppress”, you know all that follows. In 
that there is the observer trying to contro l his greed, or his envy. Now when there 
is an awareness of greed without the observ er, what takes place? Can I observe 
that greed without giving it a name, as “greed”? The moment I name it I have 
already fixed it as greed in my memory which says: I must get over it, I must 
control. So is there an observation of greed without the word, without justifying it, without condemning it? Which means,  can I observe this thing called greed 
without any reaction whatsoever? 
To so observe is a form of discipline,  isn’t it? Not imposing any particular 
pattern, which means conformity, suppression and all the rest of it, but to observe 
the whole series of actions without cond emning, justifying or naming—just to 
observe. Then you will see th e mind is no longer wasting energy. It is then aware 
and therefore it has energy to deal with that which it is observing. 
 
Questioner: May I ask, Sir, whether the “me” observing the “me” without 
naming it as the “me”, is the same as observing the past, also  without naming it 
as the past? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Quite right, Sir, that’s it. But once you understand the whole 
mechanism it does not become difficult. Once  you see the truth of it, then that 
truth, that fact, acts. One can do that at the conscious level. There are a great 
many unconscious responses, motives, incl inations, tendencies, inhibitions and 
fears. How is one to deal with all that ? Must one go through analysing layer after 
layer of hidden accumulations, exposing a ll that through dreams? How is all that 
to be exposed totally so that knowing oneself becomes complete? 
Apparently it cannot be done by the c onscious mind. I can’t investigate 
consciously the unconscious, the hidden.  Can you? Don’t say “no”—see the 
difficulty of it, because I don’t know what is hidden, and the hidden may intimate 
through dreams, but the dreams need to be  interpreted and that will take a lot of 
time, won’t it? 
 
Questioner: I think it is possible under ce rtain drugs to know myself—there is no 
conflict. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Does any drug really expose the totality of the content of 
consciousness, or does it bring about chemically a certain state of mind, which is 
totally different from the understanding of  oneself? I have watched many people 
in India taking drugs and I ha ve also watched students at universities in America, 
and others, who have been taking psychedelic drugs. These drugs do affect the 
mind, the brain cells themselves—they dest roy the brain. If you have talked to 
those who have taken drugs, you see th ey can’t reason, they can’t pursue a 
logical sequence of thought. I am not aski ng you not to take dr ugs, it’s up to you; 
but you can see the effect of it on peop le. They have no sense of responsibility, 
they think they can do anything they like—and how many hospitals are full of 
people who are mentally unbalanced thro ugh drugs. We are talking of something 
which is non-chemical. If LS D, or any other drug, coul d bring about a state of 
mind in which there is no conflict, and at the same time one could maintain 
complete responsibility and a logical se quence of thought and action, that would 
be marvellous. 
We are asking: how is one to expose th e whole hidden content at one glance? 
Not through a series of dreams, not thro ugh analysis, all th at implies time and 
wastage of energy. This is an important  question because I want to understand myself—myself being all my past, the expe riences, the hurts, the anxieties, the 
guilt, the various fears. How am I to comprehend all that immediately? To 
understand all that immediately gives i mmense energy. Now ho w do you do that? 
Is that an impossibility? We have to as k the impossible questio n to find a way out 
of it. Unless we ask the most impossibl e question we shall always be dealing 
with what is possible, and what is possible is very little. So I am asking the most 
impossible question, which is: to have this whole content of consciousness 
exposed and understand it, see it tota lly, without time—wh ich means without 
analysis, exploration and s eeing layer after layer, which is an expenditure of 
time. How is the mind to observe th is whole content with one look? 
If that question is put to you, as it is be ing put now, if you are really listening 
to that question, what is your response? You obviously say “I can’t do it”. You 
really don’t know how to do it. Are you  waiting for somebody to tell you? If I 
say to myself, “I don’t know”, am I wa iting for somebody to inform me—am I 
expecting an answer? When I am expecting an answer, then I already know. Are 
you following this? When I say, “I don’t know, I really  don’t know”—I am not 
waiting for anybody to tell me, I am not expecting anything because nobody can 
answer it. So I actually don’t know. What is the state of the mind that says “I 
really don’t know”? I can’t find it in any book, I can’t ask anybody, I can’t go to 
any teacher or priest, I really don’t know.  When the mind says  “I do not know”, 
what is the state of the mi nd? Please, don’t answer me. Do look at it, because we 
always say we know. I know my wife, I know mathematics, I know this, I know 
that. We never say, “I really don’t know” . I am asking: what is the state of the 
mind that honestly says, “I don’t know”? Don’t verbalize immediately. When I 
really mean I don’t know, the mind has no  answer. It is not expecting anything 
from anybody. It is not waiting, it is not expecting. So what happens? Is it not 
completely alone? It is not isolated—i solation and aloneness are two different 
things. In that quality of aloneness there is no influenc e, there is no resistance, it 
has shed itself from all the past, it says , “I really don’t know.” Therefore the 
mind has emptied itself of all its content. Have you understood this? 
I have asked the impossible questi on and I have said, “I don’t know.” 
Therefore the mind empties itself of ev erything, of every suggestion, every 
probability, every possi bility; so the mind is completely active and empty of all 
the past—which is time, analysis, the au thority of somebody. So it has exposed 
all the content of itself by denying the c ontent. Do you unde rstand now? As we 
said, meditation can only be gin with the total understa nding of myself; that is 
part of the beginning of me ditation. Without understa nding myself the mind can 
deceive itself, it can have illusions according to its particular conditioning. When you know your condit ioning and are free of it, then there is no possibility of any 
kind of illusion, and that is absolutely essential because we can deceive ourselves 
so easily. So when I investig ate into myself, I see that consciousness is emptying 
itself of all its content through knowing itself, not by denying anything, but by 
understanding the whole content; that brings about great energy, which is 
necessary, because that energy transforms  completely all my activity. It is no 
longer self-centred and ther efore the cause of friction. Meditation is a way of putting aside al together everything that man has 
conceived of himself and of the world. So  he has a totally different kind of mind. 
Meditation also means awaren ess, both of the world and of the whole movement 
of oneself, to see exactly what is, with out any choice, without any distortion. 
Distortion takes place the mo ment you bring in thou ght. Yet thought has to 
function, but when there is an observation and thought inte rferes with that 
observation as image, then there is dist ortion and illusion. So to observe actually 
what is, in oneself and in the world, w ithout any distortion, a quiet, very still 
mind is necessary. One knows that it is ne cessary to have a quiet mind, therefore 
there are various systems to help you to control it, and all that means friction. If 
you want to observe passionately, with intensity, the mind inevitably becomes 
quiet. You don’t have to force it—the mome nt you force it, it is not quiet, it is 
dead. Can you see this truth, that to pe rceive anything you must look?—and if 
you look with prejudice you cannot se e. If you see that, your mind is quiet. 
Now what takes place in a quiet mind? We are enquiring not only into that 
quality of energy in which there is no friction, but al so into how to bring about a 
radical change within oneself. One’s self  is the world and the world is oneself—
the world is not the fruit separate from me: I am the world. It is not just an idea, 
but an actual fact, that I am the world and the world is “me”. So there is a radical 
revolution, a change in me that will inevitably affect th e world, because I am part 
of the world. 
In this enquiry into what meditation is , I see that any wastage of energy is 
caused by friction in my relationship with another. Is it possible to have a 
relationship with another in which ther e is no friction whatsoever? That is 
possible only when I understand what love is, and the u nderstanding of what love 
is, is the denial of what love is not. Jealousy, amb ition, greed, self-centred 
activity, obviously all that is not love. Wh en in the understanding of myself there 
is the total setting aside of all that which is not love, then it is. The observation 
takes a second, the explanation and the de scription takes a long time, but the act 
of observation is instantaneous. 
In this observation I have found no system, no authority, no self-centred 
activity, therefore there is no conformity, no comparison of myself with another; 
to observe all this the mind must be extr aordinarily quiet. If you want to listen to 
what is being said just now , you have to give atten tion, haven’t you? You can’t 
listen if you are thinking about somethin g else. If you are bored with this, I can 
get up and go, but to force yourself to listen is absurd. If you are really interested 
in it passionately, intensely, then you lis ten completely, and to listen completely 
the mind must be quiet—this is very simple . All this is meditati on; not just sitting 
for five minutes by yourself, cross-le gged, breathing properly—that is not 
meditation, that is self-hypnosis. 
I want to find out what is the quality of  the mind that is completely still and 
also what takes place when it is still. I have observed , I have recorded, I have 
understood and I have finished  with that. But there is a nother enquiry: what is the 
state of the mind, of the brain cells themselves? The brain cells store up the 
memories that are useful, that are necessary  for their self-protection, memories of 
what might lead to danger. Haven’t you no ticed this? I suppose you read a lot of books? Personally I don’t, therefore I can look into myself and find out, watch 
myself, not according to somebody—but just watch. I am  asking myself what is 
the quality of such a mind, what has happened to the brain? The brain records, 
that is its function. It functions only through memory which pr otects it, otherwise 
it can’t function. The brain may find se curity in some neurosis; it has found 
security in nationalism, in a belief in th e family, in having possessions, which are 
all various forms of neurosis. The brain must be secure to function and it may 
choose to find that security  in something that is fals e, unreal, illusory, neurotic. 
When I have examined myself thoroughly, all this disappears. There is no 
neurosis, no belief, no nationa lity, no desire to hurt an ybody, nor to recall all the 
hurts. So the brain then is a recording instrument, without thought using it as the 
“me” in operation. So meditation implie s not only the body being still but also 
the brain being quiet. Have you ever watched your brain in  operation? Why you 
think certain things. Why yo u react to others, why you feel desperately lonely, 
unloved, with nothing to rely on, no hope —you know this tremendous sense of 
loneliness? Though you may be married, ha ve children and live in a group, there 
is this feeling of complete emptiness. Se eing it, one tries to escape from it, but if 
you remain with it, do not escape from it, just look at it completely without 
condemning it or trying to overcome it, but observe it ac tually as it is, then you 
will see that what you considered  to be loneliness ceases to be. 
So the brain cells record, and thought as the “me”—my ambitions, my greed, 
my purposes, my fulfilment—comes to an  end. Therefore the brain and the mind 
become extraordinarily qu iet and only function when necessary. Therefore your 
brain, your mind, enters into quite a di fferent dimension of which there is no 
description; because the desc ription is not the described.  What we have done this 
morning is description, explanation, bu t the word is not the thing, when one 
realizes that then one is free of the wo rd. The quiet mind then  enters into the 
immeasurable. 
All our life is based on thought which is measurable. It measures God, it 
measures its relationship with another thro ugh the image. It tries to improve itself 
according to what it thinks it should be. So  unnecessarily we live in a world of 
measurement, and with that world we want to enter into a world in which there is 
no measurement at all. Med itation is the seeing of what is and going beyond it—
seeing the measure and going beyond the measure. What takes place when the 
brain, the mind and the body are really  quiet and harmonious—when the mind, 
the body and the heart are co mpletely one? Then  one lives a totally different kind 
of life. 
 
Questioner: What is intuition? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : One has to be very careful of that word. Because I like 
something unconsciously, I say I have an intuition about it. Don’t you know all the tricks one plays upon oneself through th at word? When you see things as they 
are, why do you want intuition? Why do you want any fo rm of hunch, of 
intimation? We are talking of understanding oneself. 
 Questioner: When one is aware of on e’s sexual appetites, they seem to 
disappear. Can that awarene ss, that attention, be maintained all the time? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Watch the danger of this ques tion. “When I am aware of my 
sexual desires they seem to disappear.” So awareness is a trick which will help 
me to make things, which I don’t like, disappear. I don’t like anger, therefore I 
am going to be aware of it and perhaps it will disappear. But I do like my 
fulfilment, I want to become a great man, and I won’t be aware of that. I believe in God and I worship the State, but I won’ t be aware of all the dangers involved 
in that, although it separates, it destroys, it tortures people. So I am going to be aware of the things that are most unpl easant, but unaware of all those things 
which I want to keep . Awareness is not a trick, it is  not something that will help 
me to dissolve the things we don’t want. Awareness means to observe the whole movement of like and dislik e, of your suppressions. If you are old-fashioned you 
don’t talk about sex, you suppress it, but you go on thinking about it—one has to be aware of all that. 
 
Questioner: Sir, can we by understanding our minds, be aware when we are 
asleep? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : This is really a co mplex question. How am I to be aware that I 
am asleep? Is there an awareness of what is going on during sleep? Am I aware during the day of all the movements that  are going on with in me, of all the 
reactions? If I am not aware during the da y, how am I going to be aware at night 
when I sleep? If you are aware during the day, watching, attentive to how much 
you eat, what you say, what you think, of your motives,  then have you anything 
to be aware of during the ni ght? Please find out. If you are not aware, except of 
that which is going on as a recording in the brain, what takes place? I have spent 
my day actively, being aware, watching what  I eat, what I think, what I feel, how 
I talk to others. Jealousy, envy, greed,  violence—I have been completely aware 
of all that; which means I have brought or der there, not according to any plan. I 
have lived a disordered life of not being aware; when I become aware of all this, 
there is order. So when the body goes to sleep, what takes place? Generally the 
brain tries to bring about order while you are as leep, because during the 
conscious waking hours you have lived a disordered life and the brain needs 
order. I don’t know if you have watche d it—the brain cannot function properly, 
healthily if there is no or der. So if during the day there has been order, the brain 
is not trying to bring ab out order when you sleep,  through dreams, through 
intimations and so on—it becomes quiet. It  may record, but it is quiet and so 
there is a possibility of re newal, a possibility of a mi nd no longer fighting and 
struggling; therefore the mind become s extraordinarily young, fresh and 
innocent, in the sense that it won’t hurt and will not be hurt. 
 
Questioner: When a man has a message, the relationship between that man and 
his followers is usually that of a teache r. The teacher often has powers, and his message is a system. Why don’t you consider yourself a teacher and your 
message a system? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I have made this fairly clea r, haven’t I? Don’t follow anybody 
and don’t accept anybody as a teacher, ex cept when you yourself become your 
own teacher and disciple. 
 
BROCKWOOD PARK 
12 SEPTEMBER 1971  
 
 
 
 
 
 
ENGLAND  
 
X 
 
A discussion with a sm all group at Brockwood 
 
 
Violence and the “me” 1 
 
 
VIOLENCE AND THE “ME”  
 
 
Does change imply violence? To what extent do we reject violence? 
Violence and energy: observing violence. What is the root of 
violence? Understanding the “me”; the “me” that wants to change is violent. Does the “me” or intell igence see? The implications of 
seeing . 
 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : When we go into any problem or  issue we ought to go into it 
completely and thoroughly, taking one thing at a time, not vaguely talk about 
many things. So if we could take one  real human problem and talk it over 
together completely and seriously, I thin k it would be worthwhile. So what shall 
we talk about? 
 
Questioner (1): Education.  
 
Questioner (2): Our lack of awareness.  
 
Questioner (3): Love.  
 
Questioner (4): Sir, sometimes, due to nervous fatigue, the mind seems to lose its 
sensitivity. I was wondering w hat we could do to cope  with such a situation.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Could we take a problem like vi olence? It seems to me it is 
spreading all over the world; could we see what the implications  are, and whether 
the human mind can really so lve the social and also th e inward problems, without 
any kind of violence? 
As one observes, in every part of the world there are revolts and revolutions 
in order to change the social  structure. Obviously the structure has to be changed; 
is it possible to change it without violen ce?—because violence begets violence. 
Through revolt one party can assume the power of government, and having 
achieved this, it will mainta in itself in power through violence. It is fairly 
obvious that this is what is happening  throughout the world.  So we are asking 
whether there is a way of bringing about a change in the worl d and in ourselves 
which does not breed violence. I should have thought this would be a very 
serious problem for each one of us. Woul d you like to discuss this? What do you 
say? 
 
Questioner: Yes, let’s discuss violence. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : But let us go into it really deeply, not just superficially, because 
in talking this over we should bear in mind th at it must also alter our ways of life. 
I do not know if you want to go so deeply into this. My question is, whether the 
outside world, the social structure, the injustice, the divisions, the appalling 
brutality, wars, revolts and all the rest of it, can be changed, as well as the inward 
struggle that is going on perp etually. Can all that be changed without violence, 
without conflict, without opposition, without forming one pa rty as opposed to 
another party, not only outwardly, bu t also without the inward division?—
bearing in mind that division is the source of conflict an d of violence. How is one 
to bring about this change , both outwardly and inwardly? I should have thought 
that would be the most important issue th at we have to face. What do you say, 
Sirs? How do we discuss this? 
 
Questioner: Shall we start with  violence in a small child? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Shall we start with the children ? With the student, or with the 
educator?—which is ourselves. Let us talk  it over together, don’t let me do all the 
talking. 
 
Questioner (1): We should start with the educator.  
 
Questioner (2): With ourselves. I see violence in ourselves every day.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Where would you begin to resolve this problem? In all parts of 
the world, even in  Russia where some of the in tellectuals and writers are 
revolting against the tyranny, revolts are going on; they want freedom, they want 
to stop wars. Where would you start w ith this problem? Stopping wars in 
Vietnam, or in the Middle East? Wher e does one begin to understand this 
problem? At the periphery, or at the centre? 
 
Questioner: In oneself, in one’s life. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Where would you begin? With oneself, with one’s own home, 
or out there? 
 
Questioner: Why not in both  places? If one can brin g about some superficial 
change, that may resolve a certain super ficial problem. I see no reason why that 
shouldn’t take place, as we ll as individual enquiry. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Are we concerned with superfici al changes, with a superficial 
reformation? And therefore—which ma y be necessary—put our energies, 
thought, affection and care in outward, su perficial reformati on? Or do we begin 
at a wholly different level? —not as the opposite of it. 
 
Questioner: Are the two exclusive? 
 KRISHNAMURTI : I did not say they were exclusiv e. I said they were not opposite. 
 
Questioner: I don’t see it being a case of either one thing or the other. One can 
see very clearly that one can achieve savi ng a hundred lives by some superficial 
action. I see no contradiction. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I agree. There are many people who are pursuing superficial 
activities, thousands of them! Do we excl ude that and entirely concern ourselves 
with our own house, or, in the very concern for our hous e, is the other included 
too? It is not an exclusion, or an oppo sition, or the avoidance of the one, and 
laying emphasis on the other. 
 
Questioner: Well, Sir, I won’t persist, but it does seem that very often people 
listen to you—myself included—who have thought that individual enquiry was 
extremely important to resolve the immedi ate problem to the exclusion of, say, 
political action, which at its own level may resolve some particular issues, 
though not fundamental ones. But I see no  reason why they sh ouldn’t go on in 
parallel. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I quite agree, Sir. Do we deal  with the fundamental issues? 
 
Questioner: It is obviously the important thing. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So, where shall we begin? Wh ich is the fundamental issue? 
 
Questioner: The individual. The mass is the extension of the individual. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is very clear, isn’t it? We  want change, both outwardly and 
inwardly, superficially and deeply. One does not exclud e the other: I must have 
food in order to think! W ithout dividing, what is th e fundamental issue? Where 
shall we tackle it? Where sha ll we put our teeth into it? 
 
Questioner: What is the cause of violence? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Shall we discuss that? 
 
Questioner: Why do we want to change? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is a good question, too. Why should we change at all? 
 
Another Questioner: Because we don’t s eem to be getting anywhere in our 
present state. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And even if you got somewhere in your present state wouldn’t 
you want to change? Now, please, let us come back. Questioner: In our present state we seem to have very little possibility of moving; 
we are caught in our own individual ways , by some event, over and over again. 
There is this lack of movement in which we are always caught in life in some way 
or another and theref ore violence arises. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Shall we find out what are the ca uses of violence? Each one will 
have a different opinion; even the experts disagree on the causes of violence, 
volumes have been written about it! Shall we go on explaining the causes, or see 
violence as it is?—as a fundamental issu e in human relationship. And find out 
whether it should perpetuate itself, or be  changed, or modified. What is the 
fundamental issue invo lved in violence? 
 
Questioner: We are apparently issued with  a sort of animal brain, that is the 
main cause, I think we are naturally violent unless we ca n jump out of it. Half the 
time politicians are behaving just like chickens in a farmyard. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I know! ( Laughter ) 
 
Questioner: Is it possible to look at the individual state of mind to find out 
whether we are intrinsically violent within ourselves, in  the very mode of mental 
activity—whether this dualistic movement is itself violent? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So, Sir, what would you consider to be violence? 
 
Questioner (1): I think it is self-involvement, selfishness.  
 
Questioner (2): Separation.  
 
Questioner (3): Reaction to fear.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We have been educated to be vi olent. Our animal nature and the 
activity of the human brain etc. are viol ent and dividing; we all know this. Self-
centred activities, to be aggressive, opposi ng, resisting, asserting, all that makes 
for violence. 
 
Questioner: There is also part of oneself t hat is repelled by violence and another 
part which likes it, thrives on it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. There is part of oneself which resists violence, is appalled 
by violence. Then, where are we? 
 
Questioner: The desire to go into the probl em of violence is only a partial seeing. 
I mean, one does not totally want to  resolve the problem of violence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Doesn’t one? 
 Questioner: No. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Let’s find out. Is it possible to resolve the question of violence 
totally? 
 
Questioner (1): Isn’t rebelling against violence a kind of violence? I should think 
it could be very destructive.  
 
Questioner (2): If the mind, with its conditioning, is violent to start with , then the 
outcome is bound to be violence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So, what shall we do then, Sir? 
 
Questioner: Would it be wise to just watch the violence without splitting, or 
separating? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The gentleman raised the question:  do we really want to be free 
of all violence? Answer that question. Do  we? Which means to have no conflict, 
no dualistic activity within oneself, no resistance, no o pposition, no aggression, 
no ambition to be somebody, not to assert one ’s opinion and oppose other 
opinions. All that implies a form of violence. Not only the violence of self-
discipline, but also the violence that makes me twist my particular desires in 
order to conform to a pattern, to make it moral, or whatever it is; all these are forms of violence. Will is violence. Do we  want to be free of  all this? And can a 
human being live, being free from it? 
 
Questioner: It seems that in  the process we call our life, tension is necessary. We 
have to distinguish, it seems, between tens ion and violence. I am reminded of the 
story of the languishing he rrings who didn’t really come to life until some 
dogfish were put into the tank. When does normal tens ion as a process of life 
cease, and violence begin? Do we make a distinction here? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So you see tension is necessary? 
 
Questioner: In everything there is polarity. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Please, Sir, let us find out. Does a human being—us here—want 
to be free of all  violence? 
 
Questioner (1): This seems to me a very difficu lt question because there are such 
a lot of contradictions in us. One says at this moment that one does not want 
violence; the scene changes, and in an hour’s time one is  violent, one is caught. 
One is broken up into so many facets.  
 Questioner (2): Someone may seriously attempt to  bring attention to violence 
within, but how does such a person react when he is  confronted with violence 
outside? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait, Sir, that is a later questi on. Do we here see the importance 
of being totally free of all violence? Or wo uld we like to keep certain parts of it? 
Is it possible to be completely free of a ll violence?—that means to be free of all 
irritation, all anger, of any form of a nxiety, and of resistance to anything. 
 
Questioner: I think there is a differenc e between you positi ng that que stion and 
an individual saying “I want to be free of all violence”. Because the one is a 
dispassionate looking at the question,  the other one is a movement—again a 
violent movement. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is just it! 
 
Questioner: It seems to me to be a real thing, or a reasonable thing, to look at 
the question rather than try to resolve violence. To me they are two different 
things. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Then, what is the question, Sir? 
 
Questioner: Is it possible to be completely free of violence? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is all. 
 
Questioner: It is quite different fr om seeking to be free of violence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Quite! Then what do I do?—is it possible? 
 
Questioner (1): If one sees the pattern of one’s daily life, one sees that it seems 
that without some form of violence— or maybe what this gentleman calls 
tension—one could perhaps never carry through one distin ct job in the face of 
the pressures and difficulties that often su rround one in society. We talk about 
freedom from violence when we are angry, or afraid, as if we were trapped, but I 
feel that perhaps there is always some violence in our lives. It is difficult to 
conceive living, doing some job and so on, without some kind of drive which I 
feel is  violence. 
 
Questioner (2): Isn’t there a difference between tension and violence? It seems 
that violence being resistance and aggressi on, is deadening; it tries to stop 
something. Whilst tension is  moving with what you are doing. It seems to me we 
have to have an understanding of the d ifference between violence and tension.  
 KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, can we pursue that question: is it possible for a human 
being to be completely free of violence?  We have understood what we mean by 
violence, more or less. 
 
Questioner (1): I don’t think we have. If there is no difference between violence 
and energy, then I wouldn’t want to be free of violence.  
 
Questioner (2): If we could see our violence the whole time, there would be no 
violence.  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, Sir. Before we come to that point, as a human being, have I 
said to myself: is it possi ble to live without violence? 
 
Questioner: One obviously does not know. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So let us enquire, Sir, let us find out. 
 
Another Questioner: Wouldn’t the onl y way to find out be to do it? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Not only do it, but enquire, go into  it, watch it, be aware of this 
whole movement of resistance. Knowi ng the danger of violence, seeing the 
outward effects of it, the divisions, the horrors, and so on, I ask myself: is it 
possible for me to be free of all violence? I really don’t know. So I am going to 
enquire, I want to find out, not verbally, but passiona tely! Human beings have 
lived with violence for thou sands of years and I want to find out whether it is 
possible to live without violen ce. Now where shall I begin? 
 
Questioner: Would you first try to understand what violence is? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I know very well what it is: a nger, jealousy, brutality, revolt, 
resistance, ambition, all the rest of it. We don’t have to de fine endlessly what 
violence is. 
 
Questioner: I don’t really see ambition as violence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No? 
 
Another Questioner: Is it possible to see how it arises in oneself, when it comes 
up, when it reache s the surface? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, must I wait till anger comes up, and then be aware of that 
anger and say, “I am violent”? Is  that what you propose, Sir? 
 
Questioner: The movement leading up to  it is very rarely caught by us. 
 
Another Questioner: Should we underst and thought?—the sudden thoughts? KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, it is such a vast problem, don’t let us take little bits of it, let 
us observe it at the very co re. What makes the mind viol ent in me, in this human 
body, in this person? What is the source of this violence? Watch it in yourself. 
 
Another Questioner: Is it my desire to ac hieve something, to gain something, to 
be something? I want to look and see how much of the violence that I knew I had, 
I could give up—and still surv ive within acceptable limits . That would be my first 
step. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Within acceptable limits—and th at may also be violent. 
 
Questioner: Yes, I would expect I sh ould still have a degree of violence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am asking myself whether it is possible to live without  
violence and I say: what is the root of this? If I could understand that, perhaps I 
would know how to live without viol ence. What is the root of it? 
 
Questioner: The feeling of revolution, of separation. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You say the root of this violen ce is separation, division, the 
“me”. Can the mind live without the “m e”? Please go on, let us enquire. 
 
Questioner: Is it true that as long as there is an objectiv e, or desire of any kind, 
there is the seed of violence? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course! That is the whole point . We must go step by step into 
this. Please, Sirs, go on! 
 
Questioner: Does not this pose the question: is it pos sible to live without any 
objective? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. Is it possible to live wit hout any objective, without any 
principle, without any ai m, without any purpose? 
 
Questioner: The purpose is life. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The opposite of that is to drift. Therefore we must be careful 
that we don’t think in terms of the oppos ite. If I have no objective, then I am just 
drifting. So I must be very careful when I say, “To have an objective is a form of 
violence”; to have no obje ctive may be to drift. 
 
Questioner: But this is irrelevant, Sir, because whether one dr ifts or not isn’t the 
question. The question is: is it po ssible to live without violence? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I’m only warning, Sir, not to go into the opposite. Now, is it 
possible to live without direction? Direction means resistance, means no distraction, no distortion, it means a c ontinuous drive towards a goal. Why do I 
want a purpose, an end? And that end, the goal, the purpose,  the principle, the 
ideal—is it true? Or is it a thing whic h the mind has invented because it is 
conditioned, because it is afraid, because it is seeki ng security, both outwardly 
and inwardly and therefore invents some thing and pursues th at, hoping to have 
security? 
 
Another Questioner: At times one has perhaps had intima tions of this other thing 
and those intimations se em to give a drive. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, one may have an intima tion of it, but that isn’t good 
enough for me. I’m going to find out wh ether it is possible to live without 
violence, and that is a passionate thing. It is not just an ideological fancy, I really 
want to find out. 
 
Questioner: The trouble is, I don’ t really feel this question. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You don’t feel it? 
 
Questioner: Not enough to reach out, to go towards it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Why don’t you? Why not? The whol e issue of existence is this! 
 
Questioner: I think this is a problem for most of us. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Good God! They are burning, th ey are destroying, and you say, 
“I am sorry, it doesn’t really interest me!” 
 
Questioner (1): If the question of violence intere sts you, I think you are already 
assisting the burning and enjoying it. I think if you didn’t have violence in 
yourself, you wouldn’t be really interested.  
 
Questioner (2): Sir, what is the meaning of the word “violence”? Would you 
include things such as enthusiasm for something, drive, pep? Would you call 
these things violence?  
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Not what would I call it, Sir—what do you call it? 
 
Questioner: I don’t know... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am not an oracle, let us find ou t. Let us stick to this question. 
Is it possible for me to live completely  without violence? 
 
Questioner: We are caug ht in a terrible trap. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We are caught in it; do we remain in it? Questioner: No, but we have a body and a self to preserve. It is very difficult. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What shall I do?—please, answer my question! To me this is of 
tremendous importance. The world is burning . Don’t say, “My body is weak, this 
is difficult, it is not possible, I must be a vegetarian, I must not kill.” I am asking: 
is it possible? And to find that out, I must find out what the source of this 
violence is. 
 
Questioner: I think it is being divided. If I am divided I must be violent. I feel I 
will be destroyed, therefore I am afraid. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Therefore we accept violence? 
 
Questioner: No, but we want to de stroy the thing we are afraid of. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Sir, would you put it th is way: if you could find the source, the 
root of this violence, and if that root could wither away, you  might live a totally 
different kind of life. So, wouldn’t it be wort hwhile to find out what is the root of 
it, and whether it can wither away? 
 
Questioner: Probably it is connected with fear. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am not interested in fear. I want to end violence because I see 
violence begets violence. This violence is  an endless process. You know what is 
happening in the world. So I ask myself: is it possible to end violence? Before I 
can answer that question, I must find out what is the r oot of all these innumerable 
branches. 
 
Another Questioner: But we can’t do it by thinking about it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We are going to find out. We ar e going to think about it and see 
the futility of thought, and then go ou twards. But we must exercise our 
intelligence, our thought. 
 
Questioner: So long as I want to do anyt hing, there is violen ce to a greater or 
lesser degree. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I understand this. I just said, look: is it possible to live without 
violence? And to find that out, there must be an enquiry into the root of it. 
 
Questioner: What I am trying to say is, that the whole structure of life as we 
know it, is wanting to do this, wanting to  do that—everything involves violence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course, Sir, that’s agreed. 
 
Questioner: Paradoxically, might one  consider self-preservation? KRISHNAMURTI : You see, you are all not br inging up the main, fundamental 
issue. 
 
Questioner: Sir, you keep talking about th e root, but living in a town, the way life 
is at the moment, violence in human societ y is just like the air one has to breathe, 
it is like a fog that envelops everything. The question about the root of it doesn’t 
spring to my mind. One sees violence in  an animal-like way, one knows of people 
being frightened and behaving in a certain way, but one is only aware of a series 
of reactions. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I understand all that, Sir. I am as king you: what is the root of 
this? 
 
Questioner: The self. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The self! All right. If the “me” is the root of all this, what shall I 
do? Having discovered the “me” wantin g this, not wanting that, the “me” 
wanting a purpose and running after it, the “me” that resists, th at has a battle with 
itself, if that is the root  of violence—which for me is the root—then what shall I 
do with it? 
 
Questioner: You cannot do anything. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait, Sir! Do I accept it? Do I live in this battle, with this 
violence? 
 
Questioner: I feel, Sir, that if you say, “I am violent”, you haven’t got to the root 
of the problem. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, you haven’t. Quite right. 
 
Questioner: Because one can go on sa ying “I am violent” endlessly. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Agreed. I see the “me” with all its branches is the cause of 
violence; it is the “me” that separate s: you and me, we and they; the Blacks and 
the Whites, the Arabs and the Israelis, and so on. 
 
Questioner: Rationally, you coul d say: eliminate the “me”. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : How is the mind to eliminate its  own structure, which is based 
on the “me”? Sir, do look at the issue. The “m e” is the root of all this; the “me” is 
identified with a particular nation, with a particular community, with a particular 
ideology or religious fancy.  The “me” identifies itself with a certain prejudice, 
the “me” says “I must fulfil”; and when it feels frust rated, there is anger and 
bitterness. It is the “me” that says, “I mu st reach my goal, I mu st be successful”, that wants and doesn’t want, that says “I  must live peacefully”, and it is the “me” 
that gets violent. 
 
Questioner: Though it seems to be an entity, to me it is more of an action, or an 
activity. Is this word not misleading us? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, it isn’t. It does not mean it is something solid, like the trunk 
of a tree. It is a movement, it is a livin g thing. One day it feels marvellous, the 
next day it is in great depression. One da y it is passionate, lustful, the next day it 
is worn out and says, “Let me have some peace.” It is a cons tantly moving, active 
thing. How is this movement to transform itself into another movement, without 
becoming violent? First, let us get the question right. We said: this is a 
movement, it is a living thing,  it is not static, it is not something dead, it is adding 
to itself all the time, and taking away fro m itself all the time. This is the “me”. 
And when the “me” says, “I must get rid of the ‘me’,” wanting to have another 
“me”, it is still violent; the “me” that says: “I am a pacifist, I live peacefully”, the 
me that seeks truth, the me that says “I  must live beautifully, non-violently”, is 
still the “me” which is the cause of violence. 
What will the mind do with this living thing? And the mind itself is the “me”. 
Do you understand the ques tion? Any movement on the part of the “me” to get 
rid of itself, to say “I must wither away ”, “I must destroy myself”, “I must 
gradually get rid of myself”, is still that  same movement of the “me”, is still the 
“me” which is the root of violence. Do we  realize that? Do we really see that? 
Not theoretically, but actually  realize the truth of it, that any movement of the 
“me” in any direction, is the action of  violence. Do I actually, sensuously, 
intelligently, see the truth of it, know the feel of it? If the mind does not, it can go 
on playing with words for ever. 
 
Questioner: Does the mind consist only of the “me”? Are they identical? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : When the mind is not occupied  with the “me”, it is not the 
“me”. But most of us are occupied with  the “me”, consciously or unconsciously. 
 
Questioner: We seem to be able to give up all kinds of thoughts and as the “me” 
is put together by thought, why can’t we discard it? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, Sir, it is impossible to discard anything, except perhaps 
smoking cigarettes. Please, let us stick to this one thing: do I actually see that in 
the action of the “me”, nega tive or positive, there is a form of violence? It is 
violence. If I don’t see it, why not? What is wrong with my eyesight, with my 
feeling? Is it that I am afraid what will happen if I see it? Or am I bored with the 
whole thing? Please, come on, Sirs! 
 
Questioner: Sometimes one is carried away, and therefore... 
 KRISHNAMURTI : No, Sir, no. It is not a question of being carried away. Not to be 
violent—I want to find this out! 
 
Another Questioner: We can’t rake up the energy to keep the mind on the subject. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, Sir. If you say you haven’t th e energy, the collecting of that 
energy is again a form of the “me”, whic h says “I must have more energy in 
order to tackle this”. Any movement of the “me”, which is t hought, conscious or 
unconscious, is still th e “me”. Do I really see the truth of this? 
 
Questioner: Is there something behind th e “me” which in essence is not of 
thought? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do listen to that question; d on’t say, “We don’t know or we 
do.” Is there anything behind the “me” which is not of the me? 
 
Questioner: If there is, and we think ab out it, it is yet again part of the “me”. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Who is putting this question? Surely it is the “me”! 
 
Questioner: Why not?  Thought is a tool , why not use it? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, you can’t say “Why not”— it is still the movement of the 
“me”. 
 
Questioner: You have asked: do  we really see that any movement of the “me” is 
violence? I think the only reason that we can’t see it, is because we reject 
violence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh, no. Either you see it or you do n’t see it. It isn’t a question of 
something that prevents you from seeing. I don’t see my affection for my dog, or 
for my wife, or husband, for th e beauty of it is part of me; because I think that is 
a most marvellous state. 
 
Questioner: Sir, by definition you have virtually said that life is violence, 
movement, change. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : As we live now, life, living, is a form of violence. 
 
Questioner: Is life possible w ithout change, without movement? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s what we are asking. The lif e we lead is a life of violence, 
which is caused by the “me”, and we are sa ying: do we see that  any movement of 
the “me” in any direction, conscious or un conscious, is a form of violence? If I 
don’t see it, why don’t I see it? What is wrong? 
 Questioner: It seems to me it is  the “me” that is seeing it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait. Is it the “me” that sees it? 
 
Questioner: Is it intelligence? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I don’t know, you find out! What is it that sees that the “me” is 
the root of all mischief? Sir, please watch it. Who sees it? 
 
Questioner: I don’t see it. I’m afraid to  give up everything I’ve ever known. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So you don’t want to see that th e “me” is responsible for this 
hideous mess. Because one says: I don’t care  if the world goes bust, but I want to 
have my little corner. Therefore I don’t see the “me”, the root of all mischief. 
 
Questioner: Would you say there is anot her “me”, other than the thinking 
process with an object in view? When I think towards some thing, towards an 
object, to me this is the “m e”, and there is no other “me” except that process. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Obviously. 
 
Questioner: But you said it isn’t the th ing that sees the significance of the 
question. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. We said, this “me” is a liv ing thing, a movement. All the 
time it is adding to itself and taking away from itself. And this “me”, this 
movement, is the root of all violence. Not only this “me” as something static 
which invents the soul, which invents G od, Heaven and punishment—it is the 
whole of that. 
We are asking: does the mind realize that the “me” is the cause of this 
mischief? The mind—use the word inte lligence if you like—which sees the 
whole map of violence, all the intricacie s, sees it by observing, this mind says: 
that is the root of all evil. So the mind now asks: is it possibl e to live without the 
“me”? 
 
Questioner: The process of seeing is different from the pro cess of moving in a 
certain direction towards something. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Right. The process of seeing is  entirely different. It is not a 
process. I won’t use that word. The seeing is seeing now; it is not a process of 
seeing. Seeing is acting. Now, does the mi nd see this whole map of violence and 
the root of it? And what is it that sees? If the “me” sees it, then it is afraid to live 
differently, then the “me” says “I must protect myself, I must resist this, I am 
afraid”. Therefore the “me” refuses to see the map. But the seeing is not the “me”. 
 Questioner: Seeing has no purpose, has it? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : There is no purpose in seeing the map; it just sees. 
 
Questioner: But, immediately I say that I see it... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Wait! Do we realize that the mind which is observing this entire 
map is entirely different from the “me” which sees it and is afraid to break from 
it? There are two different observati ons: the “me” seeing, and “seeing”. The 
“me” seeing must inevitably be afraid, and must therefore resist and say, “How 
shall I live? What shall I do? Must I give this up? Must I hold on?” and so on. We said: any movement of the “me” is vi olence. But there is a mere seeing of the 
map, which is entirely diffe rent. Is this clear? Now, which is it that you are 
doing? 
 
Questioner: The “me” is seeing. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You say the “me” is seei ng—therefore it is afraid. 
 
Another Questioner: Of course, it is afraid. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What will you do, knowing any movement of the “me” is still 
furthering that fear? 
 
Questioner: I don’t know. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Ah! What do you mean  by, “You don’t know”? 
 
Questioner: To me, the “me” is all I know. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, Sir, we have made it very cl ear. Do listen to this. There are 
two actions of seeing. Seeing the map non-directionally, non-purposively, just 
seeing, and the “me” seeing—the “me” with its purpose, with its drive, with its 
directive, with its resistances. It sees  and is afraid to do this, or that. 
 
Questioner: Are you using the word “see” now in the way in which you normally 
speak of being aware? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am just using the word “seei ng” for a change, that’s all. 
 
Questioner: Sir, you tell me there is a state in which you can see without the 
“me”, but I have never  experienced this. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Do it now, Sir! I am showing it to you! There is the “me” that 
looks at this whole map of violence and th erefore is afraid and resists. And there is another seeing which is not of the “me”,  which just observes, non-objectively, 
non-purposively, and says, “I just see it”. 
But this is simple, isn’t it?  I see you have got a green shirt; I don’t say, “I like 
it” or “I dislike it”, I just see it. But the moment I say, “I like it”, it is already the 
“me” saying “I like it”; and therefore all the rest of it follows. This is sufficiently 
clear—verbally at least. 
 
Questioner: Could we go into the questio n of why this lookin g without the “me” 
is so very difficult and happens so rarely? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I don’t think it is difficult. Don’ t say it is difficult; then you are 
stuck, then you ha ve blocked yourself. 
 
Questioner: Could one summarize this by  saying that in one case there is a 
seeing without purpose, and in the other case purpose is involved? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, that’s all. Can I look with out direction? When I look with a 
direction, it is the “me”. What is the difficulty in this, may I ask? 
 
Another Questioner: Usually we have the illusion that looking w ith a direction is 
looking. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Looking with a direction is not looking obviously. 
 
Questioner: There is a difference between looking and seeing. If  one is looking, 
one is involved. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Don’t let’s complicate it. We said: does the mind see the whole 
map, without any direction? 
 
Questioner: The map is selected from both directions. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, no. Just look. This whole structure of the “me” is  violence; 
the structure being the way I live, the way I think, the way I feel, my whole 
reaction to everything is a form of violence  which is the “me”. That is all in the 
category of time. The “seeing” has no tim e—you are seeing it. The moment I see 
with time there is fear. 
 
Questioner: There is seeing, and the th ing seen. When once you have seen 
something is it the old mind that has seen? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. Now do find out, Sir, ho w do you see? Do you see non-
purposively, or purposively? Do you see in terms of time?  That is, do you say, “It 
is too difficult, it is too complex, what am I to do?” Or do  you see without time? 
If you say, “I don’t see it without time, ” the next question is, “Why? What is 
the difficulty?” Is it physical blindness, or is it psychological disinclination to look at anything as it is? Is it because we  have never looked at anything directly, 
are always trying to avoid, to escape? Th erefore, if we are escaping, let us see 
that—not try to find out how to resist escape. 
 
BROCKWOOD PARK 
6 JUNE 1970  
 
 
 
 
 
 
ENGLAND  
 
XI 
 
Conversation between J. Krishnamu rti and Professor David Bohm 
 
 
On Intelligence ON INTELLIGENCE  
 
 
Conversation between J. Krishnamurti 
and Professor David Bohm 
 
 
Thought is of the order of time; inte lligence is of a different order, 
different quality. Is intelligence related to thought? Brain the 
instrument of intelligence; thought as a pointer. Thought, not 
intelligence, dominates the worl d. Problem of thought and the 
awakening of intelligence. Intelligence operating in a limited framework can serve highly unintel ligent purposes. Matter, thought, 
intelligence have a common source, are one energy; why did it divide? Security and survival: thought cannot  consider death properly. “Can 
the mind keep the purity of the or iginal source?” Problem of the 
quietening of thought. Insight, the perception of the whole, is 
necessary. Communication without the interference of the conscious 
mind. 
 
 
Professor Bohm:1 About intelligence, I always like to look up th e origin of a 
word as well as its me aning. It is very interesting; it comes from inter  and legere  
which means “To read between”. So it seems to me that you could say that 
thought is like the information in a book an d that intelligence ha s to read it, the 
meaning of it. I think this gives a rather good notion of intelligence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : To read between the lines. 
 
Bohm:  Yes, to see what it means. There is also another relevant meaning given in 
the dictionary which is: mental alertness. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, mental alertness. 
 
Bohm:  Well, this is very different from wh at people have in mind when they 
measure intelligence. Now, considering many of the things y ou have said, you 
would say intelligence is not thought. Y ou say thought takes place in the old 
brain, it is a physical process, electr ochemical; it has been amply proved by 
science that all thought is  essentially a physical, ch emical process. Then we 
could say perhaps that intellig ence is not of the same order, it is not of the order 
of time at all. 
 
                                                 
1 David Bohm, Professor of Theoretical Physics at Birkbeck College, London University; author of 
Causality & Chance in Modern Physics , Quantum Theory , The Special Theory of Relativity . KRISHNAMURTI : Intelligence. 
 
Bohm:  Yes, intelligence reads “b etween the lines” of tho ught, sees the meaning 
of it. There is one more point before we  start on this questi on: if you say thought 
is physical, then the mind or intelligence or whatever you want to call it, seems 
different, it is of a different order. Would you say there is a real difference 
between the physical and intelligence? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. Are we saying that thought is matter? Let us put it 
differently. 
 
Bohm:  Matter? I would rather call it a material process. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : All right; thought is a materi al process, and what is the 
relationship between that and intelligence? Is intelligence the product of thought? 
 
Bohm:  I think that we can take for granted that it is not. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Why do we take it for granted? 
 
Bohm:  Simply because thou ght is mechanical. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Thought is mechanical, that is right. 
 
Bohm:  Intelligence is not. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So thought is measurable; in telligence is not . And how does it 
happen that this intellige nce comes into existence? If thought has no relationship 
with intelligence, then is the cessation of  thought the awakening of intelligence? 
Or is it that intelligence, being independ ent of thought, not of time, therefore 
exists always? 
 
Bohm:  That raises many difficult questions. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I know. 
 
Bohm:  I would like to put this in a framework  of thinking that one could connect 
with any scientific views that may exist. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. 
 
Bohm:  Either to show that it fits or doesn’t fit. So you sa y intelligence may be 
there always. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am asking—is it there always? 
 Bohm:  It may or may not be. Or it is po ssible that something interferes with 
intelligence? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : You see the Hindus have the theory that in telligence, or 
Brahman, exists always and is covere d over by illusion, by matter, by stupidity, 
by all kinds of mischievous things created by thought. I don’t know if you would 
go as far as that. 
 
Bohm:  Well, yes; we don’t actually see th e eternal existence of intelligence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : They say peel all this off, that thing is there. So their assumption 
is that it existed always. 
 
Bohm:  There is a difficulty in th at, in the word “always”. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. 
 
Bohm:  Because “always” implies time. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is right. 
 
Bohm:  And that is just the trouble. Time is thought—I would like to put it that 
thought is of the order of time—or perhap s it is the other way round—that time is 
of the order of thought. In other words thought has invented time, and in fact 
thought is time. The way I see it is, that t hought may sweep over the whole of 
time in one moment; but then thought is always changi ng without noticing that it 
is changing physically—for physical reasons, that is. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. 
 
Bohm:  Not rational reasons. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. 
 
Bohm:  The reasons do not have to do with something total, but they have to do 
with some physical movement  in the brain; therefore... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : ...they depend on environment and all kinds of things. 
 
Bohm:  So as thought changes with time its meaning is no longer consistent, it 
becomes contradictory, it changes in an arbitrary way. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, I’ll follow that. 
 
Bohm:  Then you begin to think,  everything is changing, everything changes, and 
one realizes “I am in time”. When tim e is extended it becomes vast, the past before I was, further and fu rther back and also forward in the future, so you begin 
to say time is the essence of all, time conquers everything. First the child may 
think, “I am eternal”; then he begins to understand that he is in time. The general 
view that we get to is, that time is the essence of existence. This I think is not 
only the common sense view but also the scie ntific view. It is very hard to give 
up such a view because it is an intense co nditioning. It is stronger even than the 
conditioning of the obser ver and the observed. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, quite. Are we saying that thought is of time, thought is 
measurable, thought can ch ange, modify, expand? And intelligence is of a 
different quality altogether? 
 
Bohm:  Yes, different order, different quality . And I get an interesting impression 
of this thought with regard  to time. If we think of th e past and the future, we 
think of the past as becoming the future; but you can see that that can’t be, that it is just thought. Yet one gets the impres sion that past and future are present 
together and there is movement in anothe r way; that the whole pattern is moving. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The whole pattern is moving. 
 
Bohm:  But I can’t picture how it moves. In some sense it is moving in a 
perpendicular direction to the directi on between past and future. That whole 
movement—then I begin to think that  movement is in another time. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Quite, quite. 
 
Bohm:  But that gets you ba ck into the paradox. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, that is it. Is intelligence out of time and therefore not 
related to thought, which is a movement of time? 
 
Bohm:  But thought must be related to it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Is it? I am asking. I think it is unrelated. 
 
Bohm:  Unrelated? But there seems to be some relation in the sense that you 
distinguish between in telligent thought and unintelligent thought. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, but that requires intellig ence: to recognize unintelligent 
thought. 
 
Bohm:  But when intelligence reads thought, what is the relationship? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Let us go slowly... 
 
Bohm:  And does thought respond to inte lligence? Doesn’t thought change? KRISHNAMURTI : Let us be simple. Thought is time. Thought is movement in 
time. Thought is measurable and though t functions in the field of time, all 
moving, changing, transforming. Is in telligence within the field of time? 
 
Bohm:  Well, we’ve seen that in one sense it can’t be. But the thing is not clear. 
First of all, thought is mechanical. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Thought is mechanical, that is clear. 
 
Bohm:  Secondly, in some sense there is a movement which is of a different 
direction. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Thought is mechanical; being mechanical it can move in 
different directions and all the rest of it.  Is intelligence mech anical? Let’s put it 
that way. 
 
Bohm:  I would like to ask the question, what does mechanicalness mean? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : All right: repetitive, measurable, comparative. 
 
Bohm:  I would say also dependent. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Dependent, yes. 
 
Bohm:  Intelligence—let us get it clear—in telligence cannot be  dependent on 
conditions for its truth. Nevertheless, it seems that in some sense intelligence 
doesn’t operate if the brain is not healthy. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Obviously. 
 
Bohm:  In that sense intelligence seem s to depend on the brain. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Or is it the quietness of the brain? 
 
Bohm:  All right, it depends on the quietness of the brain. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Not on the activity of the brain. 
 
Bohm:  There is still some relation between intelligence and the brain. We once 
discussed this question many years ago, when I raised the id ea that in physics 
you could use a measuring instrument in two ways, the positive and the negative. 
For example, you can measur e an electric current by th e swing of the needle in 
the instrument, or you can use the same instrument in what is called the Wheatstone bridge, where the reading you look for is a null reading; a null reading indicates harmony, balance of th e two sides of the whole system as it 
were. So if you are using the instrument negatively, then the non-movement of the instrument is the sign that it is wo rking right. Could we say the brain may 
have used thought positively to make an image of the world... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : ...which is the function of thought—one of the functions. 
 
Bohm:  The other function of thought is nega tive, which is by its movement to 
indicate non-harmony. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, non-harmony. Le t us proceed from there. Is intelligence 
dependent on the brain—have we come to that point? Or when  we use the word 
“dependent” what do we mean by that? 
 
Bohm:  It has several possible meanings. There may be simple mechanical 
dependence. But there is another kind: that one can’t exist without the other . If I 
say, “I depend on food to exist”, it doesn’t mean that everything I think is 
determined by what I eat. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, quite. 
 
Bohm:  So I propose that intelligence depend s for its existence on this brain, 
which can indicate non-harmony,  but the brain does not have  anything to  do with 
the content of intelligence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So if the brain is not harmon ious, can intelligence function? 
 
Bohm:  That is the question. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is what we are saying. It  cannot function if the brain is 
hurt. 
 
Bohm:  If the intelligence doesn’t function, is there intelligence? Therefore it 
seems that intelligence requires th e brain in order to exist. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But the brain is only an instrument. 
 
Bohm:  Which indicates this harmony or disharmony. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But it is not the creator of the other. 
 
Bohm:  No. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Let us go into this slowly. 
 
Bohm:  The brain doesn’t create intelligence but it is an instrument which helps 
intelligence to function. That is it. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : That’s it. Now if the brain is functioning within the field of 
time, up and down, negativel y, positively, can intelligence operate in that 
movement of time? Or must that instru ment be quiet for the intelligence to 
operate? 
 
Bohm:  Yes. I would put it possibly slightly  differently. The quietness of the 
instrument is the operation of intelligence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, that is right. The two are not separate. 
 
Bohm:  They are one and the sa me. The non-quietness of the instrument is the 
failure of the intelligence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is right. 
 
Bohm:  But I think it would be useful to go back into questions which tend to be 
raised in the whole of scientific and philosophical thinking. We would ask the 
question: is there some sense in which intelligence exists  independently of 
matter? You see that some people have t hought that mind and matter have some 
separate kind of existence.  This is one question that comes up. It may not be 
relevant, but I think the question should be  considered in order to help to make 
the mind quiet. The consideration of questi ons that cannot be clearly answered is 
one of the things that disturbs the mind. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But you see, Sir, when you say,  “Help to make the mind quiet”, 
will thought help the awakening of intel ligence? It means that, doesn’t it? 
Thought and matter and the exercise of t hought and the movement  of thought, or 
thought saying to itself, “I  will be quiet in order to help the awakening of 
intelligence”. Any movement  of thought is time, any  movement, because it is 
measurable, it is functioning positively or negatively, harmoniously, or 
disharmoniously, in this field. And rea lizing that thought may say unconsciously, 
or unknowingly, that “I would be quiet in or der to have this or that”, then that is 
still within the field of time. 
 
Bohm:  Yes. It is still projecting. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is projecting it to capture it. So how does this intelligence take 
place—not how—when does it awaken? 
 
Bohm:  Once again the question is in time. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is why I don’t want to  use the words “when”, “how”. 
 
Bohm:  You might perhaps say the condition fo r it to awaken is the non-operation 
of thought. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. 
 
Bohm:  But that is the same as the awakening, it is not merely the condition. You 
can’t even ask if there are conditions fo r intelligence to awaken. Even to talk 
about a condition is a form of thought. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. Let us agree, any movement  of thought in any direction, 
vertical, horizontal, in action or non-action, is still in time—any movement of 
thought. 
 
Bohm:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Then what is the relationshi p of that movement to this 
intelligence which is not a movement, whic h is not of time, which is not the 
product of thought? Where can the two meet? 
 
Bohm:  They don’t meet. But there is still a relation. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is what we are trying to fi nd out. Is there any relationship 
at all, first? One thinks there is a rela tionship, one hopes there is a relationship, 
one projects a relationship. Is there a relationship at all? 
 
Bohm:  That depends what you mean by relationship? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Relationship: being in contact with, recognition, a feeling of 
being in touch with. 
 
Bohm:  Well, the word relationship might mean something else. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What other meaning has it? 
 
Bohm:  For example there is a parallel, isn’ t there? The harmony of the two. That 
is, two things may be related without cont act, but by simply being in harmony. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Does harmony mean a movement of both in the same direction? 
 
Bohm:  It might also mean in some way keeping in the same order. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : In the same order: same direction, same depth, same intensity—
all that is harmony. But can though t ever be harmonious?—thought as 
movement, not static thought. 
 
Bohm:  I understand. There is that thought which you abstract as static, in 
geometry let us say, that may have so me harmony; but thought as it actually 
moves is always contradictory. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Therefore it has no harmony in itself. But intelligence has 
harmony in itself. 
 
Bohm:  I think I see the source of the confus ion. We have the static products of 
thought that seem to have  a certain relative harmony. But that harmony is really 
the result of intelligence, at least it seems so to me. In mathematics we may get a 
certain relative harmony of the product of thought, even though the actual 
movement of thought of a mathematician is not necessarily in harmony, 
generally won’t be in harmony. Now that  harmony which appears in mathematics 
is the result of in telligence, isn’t it? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Proceed, Sir. 
 
Bohm:  It is not perfect harmony because every form of mathematics has been 
proved to have some limit; that  is why I call it only relative. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. Now, in the movement of thought is there harmony? If 
there is, then it has relationship with intelligence. If there is no harmony but 
contradictions and all the rest of it, then thought has no re lationship with the 
other. 
 
Bohm:  Then would you say that we c ould do entirely without thought? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I would put it round the other wa y. Intelligence uses thought. 
 
Bohm:  All right. But how can it use so mething which is disharmonious? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Expression, communication,  using thought which is 
contradictory, which is not harmonious, to create things in the world. 
 
Bohm:  But still, there must be harmony in some  other sense, in what is done with 
thought, in what we have just described. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Let us go slowly in this. Can we first put into words, negatively 
or positively, what is intelligence, what is not intelligence? Or is that impossible 
because words are thought, time, measure and so on? 
 
Bohm:  We can’t put it in words. We are tr ying to point. Can we say that thought 
can function as the pointer to intelligence, and then its contradiction doesn’t 
matter? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is right. That is right. 
 
Bohm:  Because we are not using it for its cont ent, or its meaning, but rather as a 
pointer which points bey ond the domain of time. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : So thought is a pointer. The content is intelligence. 
 
Bohm:  The content which it points to. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. Can we put this thing entirely differently? May we say, 
thought is barren? 
 
Bohm:  Yes. When it moves by itself, yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Which is mechanical and all the rest of it. Thought is a pointer, 
but without inte lligence the pointer has no value. 
 
Bohm:  Could we say that intelligence read s the pointer? If the pointer has nobody 
to see it then the po inter doesn’t point. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Quite. So intelligence is necessa ry. Without it th ought has no 
meaning at all. 
 
Bohm:  But could we now sa y: that if thought is not in telligent it points  in a very 
confused way? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, in an irrelevant way. 
 
Bohm:  Irrelevant, meaningless and so on. Then with intelligence it begins to 
point in another way. But then somehow thought and in telligence seem to fuse in 
a common function. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. So we can ask: what is action in relationship to 
intelligence? Right? 
 
Bohm:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What is action in relation to in telligence, and in the carrying out 
of that action is thought necessary? 
 
Bohm:  Yes; well, thought is necessary and this thought points  obviously towards 
matter. But it seems to point both ways —back towards intellig ence as well. One 
of the questions which always comes up is: should we say that intelligence and 
matter are merely a distinction within the same thing, or are they different? Are 
they really separate? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I think they are separate, they are distinct. 
 
Bohm:  They are distinct, but ar e they actually separate? 
 KRISHNAMURTI : What do you mean by the word “separate”? Not related, not 
connected, with no common source? 
 
Bohm:  Yes. Do they have a common source? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is just it. T hought, matter and intelligence, have they a 
common source? ( Long pause.) I think they have. 
 
Bohm:  Otherwise there could be  no harmony, of course. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But you see thought has conquered the world. You 
understand?—conquered. 
 
Bohm:  Dominates the world. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Thought, the intellect, domina tes the world. And therefore 
intelligence has very little place here. When  one thing dominates, the other must 
be subservient. 
 
Bohm:  One asks, I don’t know if it is relevant, how that came about. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is fairly simple. 
 
Bohm:  What would you say? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Thought must have s ecurity; it is seeking security in all its 
movement. 
 
Bohm:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But intelligence is not seeking se curity. It has no security. The 
idea of security doesn’t exis t in intelligence. In telligence itself is secure, not, “It 
seeks security.” 
 
Bohm:  Yes, but how did it come about that  intelligence allowed itself to be 
dominated? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Oh, that is fairly cl ear. Pleasure, comfort, physical security, first 
of all physical security: security in re lationship, security in action, security... 
 
Bohm:  But that is the il lusion of security. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Illusion of security, of course. 
 Bohm:  You could say that thought got out of hand and ceased to allow itself to be 
orderly, ordered in general by intelligence, or at least to stay in harmony with 
intelligence, and began to move on its own accord. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : On its own accord. 
 
Bohm:  Seeking security and pleasure and so on. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : As we were saying the othe r day when we were talking 
together, the whole Western world is ba sed on measure; and the Eastern world 
tried to go beyond that. But they  used thought to go beyond it. 
 
Bohm:  Tried to anyway. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Tried to go beyond the measure by exercising thought; therefore 
they were caught in thought . Now security, physical se curity, is necessary and 
therefore physical existence, physical  pleasures, physical well-being became 
tremendously important. 
 
Bohm:  Yes, I was thinking about that a little . If you go back to  the animal, then 
there is instinctive response towards pleas ure and towards secur ity: that would be 
right. But now when thought comes in, it can dazzle the instinct and produce all 
sorts of glamour, more pleasure, more  security. And the instincts are not 
intelligent enough to d eal with the complexity of th ought, therefore thought went 
wrong, because it excite d the instincts and the instincts demanded more. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So thought really  created a world of illusion, miasma, 
confusion, and put away intelligence. 
 
Bohm:  Well, as we said before, that has made the brain very  chaotic and noisy 
and intelligence is the silence of the br ain; therefore the noisy brain is not 
intelligent. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : The noisy brain is not intelligent, of course! 
 
Bohm:  Well that more or less explai ns the origin of the thing. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We are trying to find out what is  the relationship, in action, of 
thought and intelligence. Everything is action or inaction. And what is the 
relationship of that to intelligence? Thought does produce chaotic action, 
fragmentary action. 
 
Bohm:  When it is not ordered by intelligence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And it is not ordered by inte lligence in the way we all live. 
 Bohm:  That is because of wh at we have just said. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is fragmented activity; it is not  an activity of a wholeness. The 
activity of wholeness is intelligence. 
 
Bohm:  Intelligence also has to unders tand the activity of thought. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, we said that. 
 
Bohm:  Now would you say that when inte lligence understands the activity of 
thought, then thought is di fferent in its operation? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, obviously. That is, if th ought has created nationalism as a 
means of security and then one sees the fa llacy of it, the seeing of the fallacy of it 
is intelligence. Thought then creates a different kind of world in which 
nationalism doesn’t exist. 
 
Bohm:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And also division, war, conflict and all the rest. 
 
Bohm:  That is very clear. Intelligence sees  the falseness of what is going on. 
When thought is free of this falseness it is different. Then it begins to be a 
parallel to intelligence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is right. 
 
Bohm:  That is, it begins to carry out  the implications of intelligence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Therefore thought has a place. 
 
Bohm:  That is very interesting because thought is never actually controlled or 
dominated by intelligence, thought always moves on its own. But in the light of 
intelligence, when the fals eness is seen, then thought moves parallel or in 
harmony with intelligence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is right. 
 
Bohm:  But there is never anything that forces thought to do anything. That would 
suggest that intelligence and thought have this common or igin or substance, and 
that they are two ways of calling attention to a greater whole. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. One can see how politica lly, religiously, psychologically, 
thought has created a world of tremendous contradicti on, fragmentation, and the 
intelligence that is the product of this conf usion then tries to bring order in this 
confusion. It is not that intelligence whic h sees the falseness of all this. I don’t know if I am making my self clear. You see, one can be terribly intelligent 
although one is chaotic. 
 
Bohm:  Well, in some ways. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is what is happening in the world. 
 
Bohm:  But I suppose it is rather hard to understand that at this moment. You 
could say that in some limited sphere it se ems that intelligence is  able to operate, 
but outside it doesn’t. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : We are, after all, concerned with living, not with theories. One 
is concerned with a life in  which intelligence operates . Intelligence which is not 
of time, which is not of measure, which is not the product or the movement of 
thought, or of the order of thought. No w a human being wants to live a different 
kind of life. He is dominated by though t, his thought is always functioning in 
measurement, in comparison, in conflict. He asks, “How am I to be free of all 
this in order to be intelligent?” “How can the ‘me’, how can ‘I’ be the instrument 
of this intelligence?” 
 
Bohm:  Obviously it can’t be. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is just it! 
 
Bohm:  Because this thought in time is  the essence of unintelligence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But one is thinking in terms of that all the time. 
 
Bohm:  Yes. That is thought projecting some sort of fantasy of  what intelligence 
is, and trying to achieve it. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Therefore I would say that thou ght must be completely still for 
the awakening of intelligen ce. There can’t be a movement of thought and yet the 
awakening of that. 
 
Bohm:  That is clear on one level. We consid er thought to be ac tually mechanical 
and this may be seen on one leve l—but still the mechanism continues. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Continues, yes... 
 
Bohm:  ...through instincts and pleasure and fear and so on. The intelligence has 
to come to grips with  this question of the pleasures,  the fears, the desires, which 
make thought continue. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. 
 Bohm:  And you see there is always a trap: this is our concept or image of it, 
which is partial. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So as a human being I would be concerned only with this 
central issue. I know how c onfused, contradictory, disharmonious one’s life is. Is 
it possible to change that so that intelligen ce can function in my life, so that I live 
without disharmony, so that  the pointer, the direction is guided by intelligence? 
That is perhaps why the religious people,  instead of using the word intelligence, 
have used the word God. 
 
Bohm:  What is the advantage of that? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I don’t know what the advantage is. 
 
Bohm:  But why use such a word? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It came from primitive fear, fear of nature, and gr adually out of 
that grew the idea that there is a super-father. 
 
Bohm:  But that is still thought functioni ng on its own, without intelligence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course. I am just recalling th at. They said trust God, have 
faith in God, then God will operate through you. 
 
Bohm:  God is perhaps a metaphor for inte lligence—but people didn’t generally 
take it as a metaphor. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course not, it is a terrific image. 
 
Bohm:  Yes. You could say that if God means that which is immeasurable, 
beyond thought... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : ...it is unnameable, it is immeas urable, therefore don’t have an 
image. 
 
Bohm:  Then that will operate within the measurable. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. What I am trying to convey is, that the desire for this 
intelligence, through time, has created this  image of God. And through the image 
of God, Jesus, Krishna, or whatever it is , by having faith in that—which is still 
the movement of thought—one hopes that  there will be harmony in one’s life. 
 
Bohm:  And this sort of image because it is so total produces an  overriding desire, 
urge; that is, it overrides rationality... everything. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : You heard the other day what th e archbishops and bishops were 
saying, that only Jesus matters, nothing else matters. 
 
Bohm:  But it is the same movement wh ereby pleasure overrides rationality. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Fear and pleasure. 
 
Bohm:  They override; no proportion can be established. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, what I am trying to say is: you see the whole world is 
conditioned this way. 
 
Bohm:  Yes, but the question is what you have hinted at: what is this world which 
is conditioned this way? If we take this world as existing independently of 
thought, then we have fallen into the same trap. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course, of course. 
 
Bohm:  That is, the whole conditional world is the result of this way of thinking, it 
is both the cause and the effect of this way of thinking. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is right. 
 
Bohm:  And this way of thinking is dish armony and chaos and unintelligence and 
so on. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I was listening to the Labour Party Conference at Blackpool—
how clever, some of them very serious, double-talk and all that, thinking in terms of Labour Party and Conserva tive Party. They don’t say, “Let all of us get 
together and see what is the best thing for human beings.” 
 
Bohm:  They are not capable. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is it, but they are exercising their intelligence! 
 
Bohm:  Well, in that limited framework. That is what our trouble has always 
been; people have developed technology  and other things in terms of some 
limited intelligence, which is servi ng highly unintelligent purposes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, that is just it. 
 
Bohm:  For thousands of years that has been going on. Then of course the 
reactions arise: the problems are much too big, too vast. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But it is really very simple, extr aordinarily simple, this sense of 
harmony. Because it is so simple it can  function in the most complex field. KRISHNAMURTI : Let us go back. We said the source is common to both thought 
and intelligence... 
 
Bohm:  Yes, we got that far. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : What is that source? It is generally attributed to some 
philosophical concept, or they say that s ource is God—I am just using that word 
for the moment—or Brahman. That source is common, is the central movement 
which divides itself into matter and inte lligence. But that is just a verbal 
statement, it is just an idea, which is  still thought. You can’t find it through 
thought. 
 
Bohm:  That raises the question: if you find it then what are “you”? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : “You” don’t exist. “You” can’t exist when you are asking what 
is the source. “You” are time, moveme nt, environmental conditioning—you are 
all that. 
 
Bohm:  In that question the whole of  this division is put aside. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Absolutely. That is the point, isn’t it? 
 
Bohm:  There is no time... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yet we still say, “I am not going to exercise  thought.” When the 
“me” enters it means division: so understa nding the whole of this—what we have 
been talking about—I put away the “me” altogether. 
 
Bohm:  But that sounds like a contradiction. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I know. I can’t put it away. It takes place. Then what is the 
source? Can it ever be named? For instance the Je wish religious feeling is that it 
is not nameable: you don’t name it, you can’t talk ab out it, you can’t touch it. 
You can only look. And the Hindus and ot hers say the same thing in a different 
way. The Christians have tripped themselves  up over this word Jesus, this image, 
they have never gone to the source of it. 
 
Bohm:  That is a complex question; it may be that they were trying to synthesize 
several philosophies, Hebrew, Greek, and Oriental. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Now I want to get at this: what  is the source? Can thought find 
it? And yet thought is born from that sour ce; and also intelligence. It is like two 
streams moving in different directions. 
 
Bohm:  Would you say matter is also born  from that source more generally? 
 KRISHNAMURTI : Of course. 
 
Bohm:  I mean the whole universe. But then  the source is beyond the universe. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course. Could we put it this  way? Thought is  energy, so is 
intelligence. 
 
Bohm:  So is matter. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Thought, matter, the mechanical, is energy. Intelligence is also 
energy. Thought is confused, polluted, dividing itself, fragmenting itself. 
 
Bohm:  Yes, it is multiple. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And the other is not. It is not po lluted. It cannot divide itself as 
“my intelligence” and “your in telligence”. It is intelligen ce, it is not divisible. 
Now it has sprung from a source of energy which has divided itself. 
 
Bohm:  Why has it divided itself? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : For physical reasons, for comfort... 
 
Bohm:  To maintain physical existence. So a part of intelligence has been changed 
in such a way as to help to maintain physical existence. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. 
 
Bohm:  It has developed in a certain way. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And gone on in that way. Bo th are energy. There is only one 
energy. 
 
Bohm:  Yes, they are different forms of energy. There are many analogies to this, 
although it is on a much more limited scale. In physics you could say light is 
ordinarily a very complex wa ve motion, but in the lase r it can be made to move 
all together in a very simple and harmonious way. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. I was reading about the laser. What monstrous things they 
are going to do with it. 
 
Bohm:  Yes, using it destructively. Though t may get something good but then it 
always gets used in a broader way that is destructive. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : So there is only energy, which is the source. 
 
Bohm:  Would you say energy is a kind of movement? KRISHNAMURTI : No, it is energy. The moment it is a movement it goes off into 
this field of thought. 
 
Bohm:  We have to clarify this notion of ener gy. I have also look ed up this word. 
You see, it is based on th e notion of work; energy m eans, “To work within.” 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Work within, yes. 
 
Bohm:  But now you say there is an ener gy which works, but no movement. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. I was thinking about this yesterday—not thinking—I 
realized the source is there, uncontaminated, non-movement, untouched by 
thought, it is there. From that these two are born. Wh y are they born at all? 
 
Bohm:  One was necessary for survival. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is all. In survival this—i n its totality, in its wholeness—has 
been denied, or put aside. Wh at I am trying to get at is  this, Sir. I want to find 
out, as a human being living in this world with all the chaos and suffering, can 
the human mind touch that source in wh ich the two divisions don’t exist?—and 
because it has touched this source, which has no divisions, it can operate without 
the sense of division. I don’t know if I am conveying this? 
 
Bohm:  But how is it possible for the human mind not  to touch the source? Why 
does it not touch the source? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Because we are consumed by thought, by the cleverness of 
thought, by the movement  of thought. All their gods, their meditations—
everything is that. 
 
Bohm:  Yes. I think this brings us to the qu estion of life and deat h. This relates to 
survival; because that is one of th e things that gets in the way. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Thought and its field of secur ity, its desire for security, has 
created death as somethin g separate from itself. 
 
Bohm:  Yes, that may be the key point. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is. 
 
Bohm:  You can look at it this way. Th ought has constructed itself as an 
instrument for surviv al. Now therefore... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : ...it has created immo rtality in Jesus, or in this or that. 
 Bohm:  Thought cannot possibly contemplate its own death. So if it tries to do so, 
it always projects something else, some other broader point of view from which 
it seems to look at it. If anyb ody tries to imagine that he is dead, then he is still 
imagining that he is aliv e and looking at himself as dead. You can always 
complicate this in all sorts of religious  notions; but it seems to be built into 
thought that it cannot possibly consider death properly. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It cannot. It means ending itself. 
 
Bohm:  That is very interesting. Suppose we  take the death of the body, which we 
see outwardly; the organism dies, it loses its energy and therefore it falls apart. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : It is really that the body is the instrument of the energy. 
 
Bohm:  So let us say the energy ceases to imbue the body and therefore the body 
no longer has any wholeness. You could say that with thought al so; the energy in 
some ways goes to thought, as to the body—is that so? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is right. 
 
Bohm:  You and other people have often used the phrase: “The mind dies to the 
whole of thought.” That way of putting it is puzzling at first,  because you would 
think it was thought that should die. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Quite, quite. 
 
Bohm:  But now you are saying that  it is the mind that dies, or the energy that dies 
to thought. The nearest I can  see to what that means is, that when thought is 
working it is invested with a certain energy by the mi nd or the in telligence; and 
when thought is no longer relevant, then the energy goes and thought is like a dead organism. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is right. 
 
Bohm:  Now it is very hard for the mind to  accept this. The comparison between 
thought and the organism seems so poor, because thought is insubstantial and the 
organism is substantial. So the death of the organism appears to be something far 
more than the death of tho ught. Now this is a point that is not clear. Would you 
say that in the death of th ought we have the essence of  the death of the organism 
as well? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Obviously. 
 
Bohm:  Although it is on a small scale, as  it were, it is of the same nature? 
 KRISHNAMURTI : As we said, there is energy in both, and thought in its movement 
is of this energy, and thought cannot see itself die. 
 
Bohm:  It has no way of imagining, or proj ecting, or conceivi ng its own death. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Therefore it escapes from death. 
 
Bohm:  Well, it gives itself the illusion. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Illusion of course. And it has cr eated the illusion of immortality 
or a state beyond death, a projection of  its own desire for its own continuity. 
 
Bohm:  Well, that is one thing, that thought may have begu n by desiring the 
continuity of the organism. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, that is right, and then gone on beyond it. 
 
Bohm:  Gone beyond that, to desire its own co ntinuity. That was the mistake, that 
was where it went wrong. It regarded its elf as an extension, not merely an 
extension, but the essence of the organism . At first thought is functioning merely 
in the organism and then thought begins to present itself as the essence of the 
organism. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That’s right. 
 
Bohm:  Then thought begins to desire its own immortality. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And thought itself knows, is very well aware that it is not 
immortal. 
 
Bohm:  It knows it only outwardly, though. I mean, it knows it as an outward fact. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Therefore it creates immortality in pictures, images. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I listen to all this as an outsider and I say to myself, “This is 
perfectly true, so clear, logical, sane; we  see it very clearly, both psychologically 
and physically.” Now my ques tion, observing all this, is: can the mind keep the 
purity of the original source? The original pristine clarity of that energy which is 
not touched by the corruption of thought?  I don’t know if I am conveying it? 
 
Bohm:  The question is clear. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Can the mind do it? Can the mind ever discover that? 
 
Bohm:  What is the mind? 
 KRISHNAMURTI : The mind, as we now say, or organism, thought, the brain with 
all its memories, experiences and all that , which is all of time. And the mind 
says, “Can I come to this?” It cannot. Th en I say to myself, “As it cannot, I will 
be quiet.” You see the tricks it has played. 
 
Bohm:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I will learn how to be quiet; I w ill learn how to meditate in order 
to be quiet. I see the importance of having  a mind that is free of time, free of the 
mechanism of thought, I will control it, subjugate it, put away thought. But it is 
still the operation of thought. That is very clear. Then wh at is it to do? Because a 
human being lives in this disharmony, he mu st enquire into this. And that is what 
we are doing. As we begin to  enquire into it, or in e nquiring, we come to this 
source. Is it a perception, an insight, an d has that insight not hing whatsoever to 
do with thought? Is insight the result of thought? The c onclusion of an insight is 
thought, but insight itself is  not thought. So I have got a key to it. Then what is 
insight? Can I invite it, cultivate it? 
 
Bohm:  You can’t do any of that. But there is a kind of energy that is needed. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That is just it. I can’t do any of that. When I cu ltivate it, it is 
desire. When I say I will do this or that , it is the same. So insight is not the 
product of thought. It is not in the or der of thought. Now, how does one come 
upon this insight? ( Pause) We have  come upon it because we denied all that. 
 
Bohm:  Yes, it is there. You can never answ er that question, how you come upon 
anything. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No. I think it is fairly clear, Si r. You come upon it when you see 
the whole thing. So insight is the percep tion of the whole. A fragment cannot see 
this, but the “I” sees the fragments, an d the “I” seeing the fragments sees the 
whole, and the quality of a mind that sees the whole is not touched by thought; 
therefore there is perception, there is insight. 
 
Bohm:  Perhaps we will go over th at more slowly. We see all the fragments: could 
we say the actual energy, activity, whic h sees those fragments is whole? 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes, yes. 
 
Bohm:  We don’t manage ever to see the whole because... 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : ...we are educated—and all the rest of it. 
 
Bohm:  But I mean, we wouldn’t anyway se e the whole as something. Rather, 
wholeness is freedom in seeing all the fragments. 
 KRISHNAMURTI : That is right. Freedom to see.  The freedom doesn’t exist when 
there are fragments. 
 
Bohm:  That makes a paradox. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Of course. 
 
Bohm:  But the whole does not start from the fragments. Once the whole operates 
then there are no fragments . So the paradox comes from supposing  that the 
fragments are real, that they exist indepe ndently of thought. Then you would say, 
I suppose, that the fragments are there w ith me in my thought s, and then I must 
somehow do something about them—that w ould be a paradox. The whole starts 
from the insight that these fragments are in a way nothing. That is the way it 
seems to me. They are not substantia l. They are very insubstantial. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Insubstantial, yes. 
 
Bohm:  And therefore they do n’t prevent wholeness. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Quite. 
 
Bohm:  You see, one of the things that often causes confusion is that, when you 
put it in terms of thought, it seems that you are presented with the fragments that 
are real, substantial reality . Then you have to see th em, and nevertheless you say, 
as long as the fragments are there, there is no wholen ess so that you can’t see 
them. But that all comes back to the one thing, the one source. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I am sure, Sir, really serious people have asked this question. 
They have asked it and tried to find an answer through thought. 
 
Bohm:  Yes, well it seems natural. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : And they never saw that they were caught in thought. 
 
Bohm:  That is always the trouble. Everybody ge ts into this trouble: that he seems 
to be looking at everything, at his probl ems, saying, “Those are my problems, I 
am looking.” But that looking is only thinking, but it is confused with looking . 
This is one of the confusions that aris es. If you say, don’t think but look, that 
person feels he is already looking. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Quite. So you see, this questio n has arisen and they say, “All 
right, then I must control th ought, I must subjugate th ought and I must make my 
mind quiet so that it becomes whole, then  I can see the parts, all the fragments, 
then I’ll touch the source.” But it is stil l the operation of thought all the time. 
 Bohm:  Yes, that means the operation of thou ght is unconscious for the most part 
and therefore one doesn’t know it is going on. We may say consciously we have 
realized that all this has to be changed, it has to be different. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : But it is still going on unconsci ously. So can you talk to my 
unconscious, knowing my conscious brain is going to resist you? Because you 
are telling me something which is revol utionary, you are telling me something 
which shatters my whole house which I ha ve built so carefully, and I won’t listen 
to you—you follow? In my instinctive reactions I push you away. So you realize 
that and say, “Look, all right, old friend, just don’t bother to listen to me. I am going to talk to your unconscious. I am going to talk to your unconscious and 
make that unconscious see th at whatever movement it doe s is still within the field 
of time and so on.” So yo ur conscious mind is never in operation. When it 
operates it must inevitably eith er resist, or say, “I will accept”; therefore it creates 
a conflict in itself. So can you talk to my unconscious? 
 
Bohm:  You can always ask how. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : No, no. You can say to a friend, “Don’t resist, don’t think about 
it, but I am going to talk to you.” “W e two are communicating with each other 
without the conscious mind listening.” 
 
Bohm:  Yes. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : I think this is what really take s place. When you were talking to 
me—I was noticing it—I was not liste ning to your words so much. I was 
listening to you. I was open to you, not to  your words, as yo u explained and so 
on. I said to myself, all right, leave all that, I am listening to y ou, not to the words 
which you use, but to the meaning, to th e inward quality of your feeling that you 
want to communicate to me. 
 
Bohm:  I understand. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : That changes me, not all this ve rbalization. So can you talk to 
me about my idiocies, my illusions, my peculiar tendencies, without the conscious mind interfering and saying, “P lease don’t touch all this, leave me 
alone!” They have tried subliminal propaga nda in advertising, so that whilst you 
don’t really pay attention, your unconsc ious does, so you buy that particular 
soap! We are not doing that, it would be deadly. What I am saying is: don’t listen 
to me with your conscious ears but liste n to me with the ears that hear much 
deeper. That is how I listened to yo u this morning because I am terribly 
interested in the source, as you are. You foll ow, Sir? I am really interested in that 
one thing. All this is the explicable, eas ily understood—but to come to that thing 
together, feel it together! You follow? I think that is th e way to break a 
conditioning, a habit, an im age which has been cultivate d. You talk about it at a level where the conscious mind is not to tally interested. It sounds silly, but you 
understand what I mean? 
Say for instance I have a conditioning;  you can point it out a dozen times, 
argue, show the fallacy of it, the stupidity —but I still go on. I resist, I say what it 
should be, what shall I do in  this world otherwise, and all the rest of it. But you 
see the truth, that as long as the mind is conditioned there mu st be conflict. So 
you penetrate or push aside my resistance  and get to that, get the unconscious to 
listen to you, because the unconscious is much more subtle, much quicker. It may 
be frightened, but it sees the danger of fear much quicker than the conscious 
mind does. As when I was walking in Ca lifornia high in the mountains: I was 
looking at birds and trees and watching, and I heard a rattler and I jumped. It was 
the unconscious that made the body jump; I saw the rattler wh en I jumped, it was 
two or three feet away, it could have struck me very easily. If the conscious brain 
had been operating it would have taken several seconds. 
 
Bohm:  To reach the unconsciou s you have to have an  action which doesn’t 
directly appeal to the conscious. 
 
KRISHNAMURTI : Yes. That is affection, that is love. When you talk to my waking 
consciousness, it is hard, clever, subtle, brittle. And you penetrate that, penetrate 
it with your look, with your affection,  with all the feeling you have. That 
operates, not anything else. 
 
BROCKWOOD PARK 
7 OCTOBER 1972  
