 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jiddu Krishnamurti  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Urgency Of Change   2Table of Content 
Awareness ..............................................................................................................3  
Is there a god? ......................................................................................................10  
Fear ......................................................................................................................14  
How To Live In This World ....................................................................................19  
Relationship ..........................................................................................................28  
Conflict ..................................................................................................................35  
The Religious Life .................................................................................................39  
Seeing The Whole ................................................................................................43  
Morality .................................................................................................................47  
Suicide ..................................................................................................................49  
Discipline ..............................................................................................................59  
What Is ..................................................................................................................63  
The Seeker ...........................................................................................................66  
Organisation .........................................................................................................69  
Love And Sex .......................................................................................................72  
Perception .............................................................................................................76  
Suffering ...............................................................................................................81  
The Heart And The Mind ......................................................................................84  
Beauty And The Artist ...........................................................................................88  
Dependence .........................................................................................................92  
Belief .....................................................................................................................97  
Dreams ...............................................................................................................101  
Tradition ..............................................................................................................106  
Conditioning ........................................................................................................110  
Happiness ...........................................................................................................117  
Learning ..............................................................................................................121  
Self-Expression ...................................................................................................126  
Passion ...............................................................................................................128  
Order ...................................................................................................................131  
The Individual And The Community ...................................................................134  
Meditation And Energy .......................................................................................136  
Ending Thought ..................................................................................................142  
The New Human Being .......................................................................................145   3Awareness  
 Questioner: I should like to know what  you mean by awareness because you 
have often said that awarenes s is really what yo ur teaching is about. I've tried to 
understand it by listening to your talks and reading your books,  but I don't seem 
to get very far. I know it is not a practice, and I understand why you so 
emphatically repudiat e any kind of practice, drill, s ystem, discipline or routine. I 
see the importance of that, for otherwise it becomes mechanical, and at the end 
of it the mind has become dull and stupid. I should like, if I ma y, to explore with 
you to the very end this ques tion of what it means to be  aware. You seem to give 
some extra, deeper meaning to this word, and yet it seems to me that we are 
aware of what's going on all the time. Wh en I'm angry I know it, when I'm sad I 
know it and when I'm happy I know it.  
     Krishnamurti: I wonder if we rea lly are aware of anger,  sadness, happiness? 
Or are we aware of these things only wh en they are all over? Let us begin as 
though we know nothing about it at all and start from scratch. Let us not make 
any assertions, dogmatic or subtle, but let us explore this question which, if one 
really went into it very deeply, would reveal an extraordinary state that the mind 
had probably never touched,  a dimension not touched by  superficial awareness. 
Let us start from the superficial and wo rk through. We see with our eyes, we 
perceive with our senses th e things about us - the co lour of the flower, the 
humming bird over the flower the light of this Californian sun, the thousand 
sounds of different qualities and subtle ties, the depth and the height, the shadow 
of the tree and the tree itself. We feel in  the same way our own bodies, which are 
the instruments of th ese different kinds of superfi cial, sensory perceptions. If 
these perceptions rema ined at the superficial level th ere would be no confusion at 
all. That flower, that pansy, that rose, are there, and that's all there is to it. There 
is no preference, no comparison, no like and dislike, only the thing before us 
without any psychological invo lvement. Is all this superf icial sensory perception or  4awareness quite clear? It can be expanded to th e stars, to the depth of the seas, 
and to the ultimate frontier s of scientific observation, using all the instruments of 
modern technology.  
     Questioner: Yes, I think I understand that.  
     Krishnamurti: So you see that the rose an d all the universe and the people in 
it, your own wife if you have one, th e stars, the seas, the mountains, the 
microbes, the atoms, the neutrons, this room, the door, really are there. Now, the 
next step; what you think ab out these things, or what yo u feel about them, is your 
psychological response to them. And this  we call thought or emotion. So the 
superficial awareness is a very simple matter: the door is there. But the 
description of the door is not the door, and when you ge t emotionally involved in 
the description you don't se e the door. This description might be a word or a 
scientific treatise or a strong emotional response; none of these is the door itself. 
This is very important to  understand right from th e beginning. If we don't 
understand this we shall ge t more and more confused. The description is never 
the described. Though we ar e describing something even  now, and we have to, 
the thing we are describing is not our descri ption of it, so please bear this in mind 
right through our talk. Never confuse the word with the thing it describes. The 
word is never the real, and we are easily  carried away when we  come to the next 
stage of awareness where it  becomes personal and we get emotional through the 
word.  
     So there is the superficial awarenes s of the tree, the bird , the door, and there 
is the response to that, which is thought, feeling, emotion. Now when we become aware of this response, we might call it a second depth of awareness. There is 
the awareness of the rose, and the awareness of the re sponse to the rose. Often 
we are unaware of this response to the ro se. In reality it is the same awareness 
which sees the rose and which sees the response. It is one movement and it is 
wrong to speak of the outer and inne r awareness. When there is a visual  5awareness of the tree without  any psychological involvem ent there is no division 
in relationship. But when there is a p sychological response to the tree, the 
response is a conditioned response, it is the respon se of past memory, past 
experiences, and the response is a division in relationship. This response is the 
birth of what we shall call the "me" in re lationship and the "n on-me". This is how 
you place yourself in relationship to the world. This is how you create the 
individual and the community.  The world is seen not as it is, but in its various 
relationships to the "me" of memory. This division is the life a nd the flourishing of 
everything we call our psychological being,  and from this aris es all contradiction 
and division. Are you very clear that you perceive this? When there is the 
awareness of the tree there is  no evaluation. But when th ere is a response to the 
tree, when the tree is judged with like and dislike, then a divi sion takes place in 
this awareness as the "me" and the "non-me ", the "me" who is different from the 
thing observed. This "me" is the response , in relationship, of  past memory, past 
experiences. Now can there be  an awareness, an observ ation of the tree, without 
any judgement, and can there be an observation of th e response, the reactions, 
without any judgement? In this way we eradicate the principle of division, the 
principle of "me" and "non-me", both in  looking at the tree and in looking at 
ourselves.  
     Questioner: I'm trying to follow you. Let's see if I have got it right. There is an 
awareness of the tree, that I understand. There is a psychological response to the 
tree, that I understand also . The psychological respon se is made up of past 
memories and past experiences,  it is like and dislike, it is the division into the tree 
and the "me". Yes, I think I understand all that.  
     Krishnamurti: Is this as clear as the tree itself, or is it simply the clarity of 
description? Remember, as we have already said, the described is not the 
description. What have you got, the thing or its description?  
     Questioner: I think it is the thing.   6     Krishnamurti: Therefore there is no "me" who is the descri ption in the seeing of 
this fact. In the seeing of an y fact there is no "me". Ther e is either th e "me" or the 
seeing, there can't be both. "Me" is non-s eeing. The "me" cann ot see, cannot be 
aware. Questioner: May I stop here? I think I've got the feeling of it, but I must let 
it sink in. May I co me again tomorrow?  
     * * *  
     Questioner: I think I have really  understood, non-verb ally, what you said 
yesterday. There is the awareness of the tree, ther e is the conditioned response 
to the tree, and this conditioned response is conflict, it  is the action of memory 
and past experiences, it is like and dislike, it is prej udice. I also understand that 
this response of prejudice is the birth of what we call the "me" or the censor. I see 
clearly that the "me", the "I", exists in a ll relationships. Now is there an "I" outside 
of relationships?  
     Krishnamurti: We have seen ho w heavily conditioned our responses are. 
When you ask if there is a "me" outside of  relationship, it be comes a speculative 
question as long as there is no freedom from these conditioned responses. Do 
you see that? So our first question is not whether there is  a "me" or not outside of 
conditioned responses, but ra ther, can the mind, in wh ich is included all our 
feelings, be free of this co nditioning, which is the pa st? The past is the "me". 
There is no "me" in the pres ent. As long as the mind is operating in the past there 
is the "me", and the mind is this past, the mind is this "me".  
     You can't say there is the mind and th ere is the past, whethe r it is the past of a 
few days ago or of ten thou sand years ago. So we are asking: can the mind free 
itself from yesterday? Now there are severa l things involved, ar en't there? First of 
all there is a superficial awareness. Then there is the awareness of the 
conditioned response. Then there is the realization that  the mind is the past, the 
mind is this conditioned response. Then t here is the question whether this mind 
can free itself of the past. And all this is one unitary action of awareness because  7in this there are no conclusions. Wh en we say the mind is  the past, this 
realization is not a verbal conclusion but an actual perception of fact. The French 
have a word for such a perc eption of a fact, they call it  "constatation". When we 
ask whether the mind can be fr ee of the past is this question being asked by the 
censor, the "me", who is that very past?  
     Questioner: Can the mind be free of the past.  
     Krishnamurti: Who is putting that questio n? Is it the entity wh o is the result of a 
great many conflicts, memories and experiences  - is it he who is asking - or does 
this question arise of itself, out of the per ception of the fact? If it is the observer 
who is putting the question, then he is tr ying to escape from the fact of himself, 
because, he says, I have lived so long in pain, in  trouble, in sorrow, I should like 
to go beyond this constant struggle. If he asks the question from that motive his 
answer will be a taking refu ge in some escape. One either  turns away from a fact 
or one faces it. And the word and the symb ol are a turning away from it. In fact, 
just to ask this question at  all is already an act of es cape, is it not? Let us be 
aware whether this question is  or is not an act of escape . If it is, it is noise. If 
there is no observer, then there is silence,  a complete negation of the whole past. 
Questioner: Here I am lost. How can I wi pe away the past in  a few seconds?  
     Krishnamurti: Let us bear in mind that we are discussing  awareness. We are 
talking over together this question of awareness.  
     There is the tree, and the conditione d response to the tree, which is the "me" 
in relationship, the "me" who is the very ce ntre of conflict. Now is it this "me" who 
is asking the question? - this "me" who, as we have said , is the very structure of 
the past? If the question is no t asked from the structure of  the past, if the question 
is not asked by the "me", then there is no structure of the past. When the 
structure is asking the question it is operatin g in relationship to th e fact of itself, it 
is frightened of itself and it acts to es cape from itself. When this structure does 
not ask the question, it is not acting in re lationship to itself. To recapitulate: there  8is the tree, there is the word, the response  to the tree, which is  the censor, or the 
"me", which comes from the past; and then there is th e question: can I escape 
from all this turmoil and agony? If the "m e" is asking this question it is 
perpetuating itself.  
     Now, being aware of that, it doesn't ask the question! Being aware and seeing 
all the implications of it, the question  cannot be asked. It does not ask the 
question at all because it sees the trap. Now do you see that all this awareness is 
superficial? It is the same as the awareness which sees the tree.  
     Questioner: Is there any other kind of awareness? Is there any other 
dimension to awareness? Kris hnamurti: Again let's be ca reful, let's be very clear 
that we are not asking this question with any motive. If there is a motive we are 
back in the trap of conditioned response. When the observ er is wholly silent, not 
made silent, there is surely a different qu ality of awareness coming into being?  
     Questioner: What action could ther e possibly be in any circumstances without 
the observer - what question or what action?  
     Krishnamurti: Again, are you asking this  question from this si de of the river, or 
is it from the other bank ? If you are on the other ba nk, you will not ask this 
question; if you are on that bank, your action will be from  that bank. So there is an 
awareness of this bank, with all its structure, its nature and all its traps, and to try 
to escape from the trap is to fall into another trap. And what deadly monotony 
there is in all that! Awaren ess has shown us the nature of the trap, and therefore 
there is the negation of all tr aps; so the mind is now empty.  It is empty of the "me" 
and of the trap. This mind  has a different quality, a different dimension of 
awareness. This awareness is not aware that it is aware.  
     Questioner: My God, th is is too difficult. You are sa ying things that seem true, 
that sound true, but I'm not there yet. Can you put it differently? Can you push me 
out of my trap?   9     Krishnamurti: Nobody can push you out of your trap - no guru, no drug, no 
mantra, nobody, including myself - nobody, especially myself. A ll that you have to 
do is to be aware from the beginning to the end, not become inattentive in the 
middle of it. This new quality of awareness is attention, and in this attention there 
is no frontier made by the "me". This attention is the highest form of virtue, 
therefore it is love. It is supreme intellige nce, and there cannot be attention if you 
are not sensitive to the structure and th e nature of these man-made traps.   10Is there a god?  
 Questioner: I really would like to know if there is a god. If there isn't life has no 
meaning. Not knowing god, man has invented him in a thousand beliefs and 
images. The division and the fear bred by  all these beliefs have divided him from 
his fellow men. To escape the pain and the mischief of this division he creates yet 
more beliefs, and the moun ting misery and confusion have engulfed him. Not 
knowing, we believe. Can I kn ow god? I've asked this question of many saints 
both in India and here and they've all em phasized belief. "Be lieve and then you 
will know; without belief you can neve r know." What do you think?  
     Krishnamurti: Is belief necessary to find out? To learn is  far more important 
than to know. Learning about belief is the end of belief. When the mind is free of 
belief then it can look. It is belief, or disb elief, that binds; for disbelief and belief 
are the same: they are the opposite sides of the same coin. So we can 
completely put aside positiv e or negative belief; the be liever and the non-believer 
are the same. When this actually takes place then the question, "Is there a god?" has quite a different meaning.  The word god with all its tradition, its memory, its 
intellectual and sentimental conn otations - all this is not god. The word is not the 
real. So can the mind be free of the word?  
     Questioner: I don't know what t hat means. Krishnamur ti: The word is the 
tradition, the hope, the desire to find the absolute, the striving after the ultimate, 
the movement which gives vitality to exis tence. So the word itself becomes the 
ultimate, yet we can see that  the word is not the thing. The mind is the word, and 
the word is thought.  
     Questioner: And you're asking me to strip myself of t he word? How can I do 
that? The word is the past; it is memory . The wife is the wo rd, and the house is 
the word. In the beginning was the wo rd. Also the word is the means of 
communication, identification. Your name is not you, an d yet without your name I  11can't ask about you. And you' re asking me if the mind can be free of the word - 
that is, can the mind be free of its own activity?  
     Krishnamurti: In the case of the tr ee the object is befo re our eyes, and the 
word refers to the tree by  universal agreement. Now wi th the word god there is 
nothing to which it refers, so each man can create his ow n image of that for which 
there is no reference. The theologian do es it in one way, the intellectual in 
another, and the believer an d the non-believer in thei r own different ways. Hope 
generates this belief, and then seeking. This  hope is the outcome of despair - the 
despair of all we see around us in the worl d. From despair hope is born, they also 
are two sides of the same coin. When there is no hope there is hell, and this fear 
of hell gives us the vitality of hope. Then illusion be gins. So the word has led us 
to illusion and not to god at all. God is the illusion whic h we worship; and the non-
believer creates the illusion of another go d which he worships  - the State, or 
some utopia, or some book which he thinks contains all truth. So we are asking 
you whether you can be  free of the word with it s illusion. Questioner: I must 
meditate on this.  
     Krishnamurti: If there is no illusion, what is left?  
     Questioner: Only what is.  
     Krishnamurti: The "what is" is the most holy.  
     Questioner: If the "what is" is the mo st holy then war is most holy, and hatred, 
disorder, pain, avarice and plunder. Then we  must not speak of any change at all. 
If "what is" is sacred, then  every murderer and plunder er and exploiter can say, 
"Don't touch me, what I' m doing is sacred".  
     Krishnamurti: The very simplicity of  that statement, " `what is' is the most 
sacred", leads to great misunderstanding, because we don't see the truth of it. If 
you see that what is is sa cred, you do not murder, you do not make war, you do 
not hope, you do not exploit. Having done these things you cannot claim  12immunity from a truth which you have vi olated. The white ma n who says to the 
black rioter, "What is is sacred, do not inte rfere, do not burn", has not seen, for if 
he had, the Negro would be  sacred to him, and there would be no need to burn. 
So if each one of us sees this truth ther e must be change. This seeing of the truth 
is change.  
     Questioner: I came here to find out if there is god, and you have completely 
confused me.  
     Krishnamurti: You came to ask if there is god. We said: the word leads to 
illusion which we worship, and for this illusion we des troy each other willingly. 
When there is no illusion the "what is" is  most sacred. Now let's look at what 
actually is. At a given moment the "what is" may be fear, or utter despair, or a 
fleeting joy. These things are constantly changing. And also th ere is the observer 
who says, "These things all ch ange around me, but I rema in permanent". Is that a 
fact, is that what really is? Is he not also changing, adding to and taking away 
from himself, modifying, adjusting hims elf, becoming or not becoming? So both 
the observer and the observed are constant ly changing. What is is change. That 
is a fact. That is what is.  
     Questioner: Then is love changeab le? If everything is a movement of change, 
isn't love also part of that movement? And if love is changeable, then I can love 
one woman today and sleep with another tomorrow.  
     Krishnamurti: Is that love? Or are you saying that love is different from its 
expression? Or are yo u giving to expression greater importance than to love, and 
therefore making a contradi ction and a conflict. Can love ever be caught in the 
wheel of change? If so then it can also be hate; then love  is hate. It is  only when 
there is no illusion that "w hat is" is most sa cred. When there is  no illusion "what 
is" is god or any other name that can be used. So go d, or whatever name you 
give it, is when you are no t. When you are, it is no t. When you are not, love is. 
When you are, love is not.   13 14Fear  
 Questioner: I used to take drugs but  now I am free of them. Why am I so 
frightened of everything? I wake up in the mornings paralysed  with fear. I can 
hardly move out of bed. I' m frightened of going outsi de, and I'm frightened of 
being inside. Suddenly as I drive along this fear comes upon  me, and I spend a 
whole day sweating, nervous, apprehensive, and at the end of the day I'm 
completely exhausted. Some times, though very rarely , in the company of a few 
intimate friends or at the house of my pare nts, I lose this fear; I feel quiet, happy, 
completely relaxed. As I came along in my  car today, I was fr ightened of coming 
to see you, but as I came up the drive and walked to the door I suddenly lost this 
fear, and now as I sit here in this nice quiet room I feel so happy that I wonder 
what I was ever frightened about. Now I have no fear. I can smile and truthfully 
say: I'm very glad to see you!  But I can't stay here for ever, and I know that when 
I leave here the cloud of  fear will engulf me ag ain. That is what I'm faced with. I've 
been to ever so many psych iatrists and analysts, he re and abroad, but they 
merely delve into my memories of childh ood - and I'm fed up with it because the 
fear hasn't gone at all.  
     Krishnamurti: Let's forget childho od memories and all that nonsense, and 
come to the present. Here you are, and  you say you are not frightened now; 
you're happy for the moment  and can hardly imagine the fear you were in. Why 
have you no fear now? Is it the quiet, clear, well-proportio ned room, furnished 
with good taste, and this sense of welc oming warmth wh ich you feel? Is that why 
you are not frightened now?  
     Questioner: That's part of it. Also  perhaps it is you. I heard you talk in 
Switzerland, and I've heard you here, and I feel a kind of deep friendship for you. 
But I don't want to  depend on nice houses, we lcoming atmospheres and good 
friends in order not to be afraid. When I go to my parents I have  this same feeling 
of warmth. But it is deadly at home; all families are deadl y with their little enclosed  15activities, their quarrels, and the vulgarity of all that loud talk about nothing, and 
their hypocrisy. I'm fed up with it all. An d yet, when I go to them and there is this 
certain warmth, I do feel, for a while, free of this fear. The psychiatrists can't tell 
me what my fear is about. They call it a "floating fear ". It's a black, bottomless, 
ghastly pit. I've spent a great deal of money and time on be ing analysed and it 
really hasn't helped at all.  So what am I to do?  
     Krishnamurti: Is it that being se nsitive you need a certai n shelter, a certain 
security, and not being able to find it, yo u are frightened of the ugly world? Are 
you sensitive?  
     Questioner: Yes, I think so. Pe rhaps not in the way you mean, but I am 
sensitive. I don't like the noise, the bustle, the vulgarity of this modern existence 
and the way they throw se x at you everywhere you go today, and the whole 
business of fighting yo ur way to some beastly little pos ition. I am really frightened 
of all this - not that I can't fight and get a position for myself, but it makes me sick 
with fear. Krishnamurti: Most people who are sensitive need a quiet shelter and a 
warm friendly atmosphere. Either they cr eate it for themselves or depend on 
others who can give it to them - the family the wife, the husband, the friend. Have 
you got such a friend?  
     Questioner: No. I'm frightened of having such a friend. I' m frightened of being 
dependent on him.  
     Krishnamurti: So there is this is sue; being sensitive,  demanding a certain 
shelter, and depending on othe rs to give you that shelter.  There is sensitivity, and 
dependence; the two often go together. And to depend on another is to fear 
losing him. So you depend  more and more, and then  the fear increases in 
proportion to your dependence. It is a vicious circle. Have you enquired why you 
depend? We depend on the po stman, on physical comfort and so on; that's quite 
simple. We depend on people and things for our physical well-being and survival; 
it is quite natural and normal. We have  to depend on wh at we may call the  16organizational side of so ciety. But we also depend  psychologically, and this 
dependence, thou gh comforting, breeds fear . Why do we depend 
psychologically?  
     Questioner: You're talking to me about dependence now, but I came here to 
discuss fear.  
     Krishnamurti: Let's examine them both because they ar e interrelated as we 
shall see. Do you mind if we discus s them both? We we re talking about 
dependence. What is dependence? Why does one psychologically depend on 
another? Isn't depend ence the denial of  freedom? Take aw ay the house, the 
husband, the children, the po ssessions - what is a man if all these are removed? 
In himself he is insufficient, empty, lost. So out of this emptiness, of which he is 
afraid, he depends on property, on people and beliefs.  You may be so sure of all 
the things you depend on that  you can't imagine ever lo sing them - the love of 
your family, and the comfort. Yet fear cont inues. So we must be clear that any 
form of psychological depende nce must inevitably breed fear, though the things 
you depend on may seem almost indestructible. Fear arises out of this inner 
insufficiency, poverty and empt iness. So now, do you see,  we have three issues - 
sensitivity, dependenc e and fear? The three are interre lated. Take sensitivity: the 
more sensitive you are (unless you understand how to remain  sensitive without 
dependence, how to be vulnerable with out agony), the more  you depend. Then 
take dependence: the more  you depend, the more there is disgust and the 
demand to be free. This dema nd for freedom encourages fear, for this demand is 
a reaction, not freedom from dependence.  
     Questioner: Are you dependent on anything?  
     Krishnamurti: Of course I'm dependen t physically on food, clothes and shelter, 
but psychologically, inwardly, I'm not depe ndent on anything - not on gods, not on 
social morality, not on belief, not on people. But it  is irrelevant wh ether or not I am 
dependent. So, to continue: fear is t he awareness of our inner emptiness,  17loneliness and poverty, and of not being able to do anything about it. We are 
concerned only with this fear which br eeds dependence, an d which is again 
increased by dependence. If we under stand fear we also understand 
dependence. So to understand fear there must  be sensitivity to discover, to 
understand how it comes in to being. If one is at all sensitive one becomes 
conscious of one's own extr aordinary emptiness - a bo ttomless pit which cannot 
be filled by the vulgar ente rtainment of drugs nor by the entertainment of the 
churches, nor the amusements of society: nothin g can ever fill it. Knowing this the 
fear increases. This drives you to de pend, and this dependence makes you more 
and more insensitive. And knowing this is  so, you are frighten ed of it. So our 
question now is: how is one to go beyond this emptin ess, this loneliness - not 
how is one to be self-sufficient, not how is one to camouflage this emptiness 
permanently?  
     Questioner: Why do you say it is no t a question of becomi ng self-sufficient?  
     Krishnamurti: Because if you are self-sufficient yo u are no longer sensitive; 
you become smug and callous, indiffer ent and enclosed. To be without 
dependence, to go be yond dependence, doesn't mean to become self-sufficient. 
Can the mind face and live with this empti ness, and not escape in any direction?  
     Questioner: It would drive me mad to  think I had to live with it for ever.  
     Krishnamurti: Any movement away fr om this emptiness is an escape. And this 
flight away from something, away from "what is," is fear. Fear is flight away from 
something. What is is not the fear; it is the flight whic h is the fear, and this will 
drive you mad, not the emptiness itsel f. So what is this emptiness, this 
loneliness? How does it come about? Surely it co mes through comparison and 
measurement, doesn't it? I co mpare myself with the sa int, the master, the great 
musician, the man who knows, the man who has arrived. In  this comparison I find 
myself wanting and insufficient:  I have no talent, I am in ferior, I have not "realised; 
I am not, and that man is. So out of measurement and comp arison comes the  18enormous cavity of emptine ss and nothingness. A nd the flight from this cavity is 
fear. And the fear stops us from understanding this botto mless pit. It is a neurosis 
which feeds upon itself. And again, this  measurement, this comparison, is the 
very essence of dependence. So we ar e back again at d ependence, a vicious 
circle.  
     Questioner: We have come a long  way in this discu ssion and things are 
clearer. There is dependence ; is it possible not to de pend? Yes, I think it is 
possible. Then we have  the fear; is it possible not to run away from emptiness at 
all, which means, not to escape through fear? Yes, I think it is possible. That 
means we are left with the emptiness. Is it possible then to face this emptiness 
since we have stopped runn ing away from it through fear? Yes, I think it is 
possible. Is it possible finally, not to me asure, not to compar e? For if we have 
come this far, and I think we have, only  this emptiness rema ins, and one sees 
that this emptiness is the outcome of comparison. And one sees that dependence 
and fear are the outco me of this emptiness. So th ere is comparison, emptiness, 
fear, dependence. Can I really live  a life without comparison, without 
measurement?  
     Krishnamurti: Of course you have to measure to put a carpet on the floor!  
     Questioner: Yes. I mean can I live without psychological comparison? 
Krishnamurti: Do you know what it means to live without psychological 
comparison when all your lif e you have been conditioned to compare - at school, 
at games, at the university and in the o ffice? Everything is comparison. To live 
without comparison! Do you know what it means? It means no dependence, no 
self-sufficiency, no seeking, no asking; therefore it means to love. Love has no 
comparison, and so love has no fear. Love is not aware of itself as love, for the 
word is not the thing.   19How To Live In This World  
 Questioner: Please, sir, could you tell me how I am to live in this world? I don't 
want to be part of it yet I have to live in it, I have to hav e a house and earn my 
own living. And my neighbours are of this world; my chil dren play with theirs, and 
so one becomes a part of this ugly mess,  whether one wants to or not. I want to 
find out how to live in this world withou t escaping from it, without going into a 
monastery or around the world in a sail ing boat. I want to educate my children 
differently, but first I want to know how to live surrounded by so much violence, 
greed, hypocrisy, compet ition and brutality.  
     Krishnamurti: Don't let's make a problem of it. When anything becomes a 
problem we are caught in the solution of it, and th en the problem becomes a 
cage, a barrier to further ex ploration and understanding. So don't let us reduce all 
life to a vast and complex problem. If the qu estion is put in order to overcome the 
society in which we live, or to find a substi tute for that society, or to try to escape 
from it though living in it, it must inevitably lead to a contradictory an d hypocritical 
life. This question also imp lies, doesn't it, the complete denial of ideology? If you 
are really enquiring you cannot start with  a conclusion, and all ideologies are a 
conclusion. So we must begin by finding out what you mean by living. Questioner: 
Please, sir, let's go step by step.  
     Krishnamurti: I am very glad that we can go into this step by step, patiently, 
with an enquiring mind and heart. No w what do you mean by living?  
     Questioner: I've never tried to put it into words. I'm be wildered, I don't know 
what to do, how to live. I've lost faith in everything - relig ions, philosophies and 
political utopias. There is war between in dividuals and between nations. In this 
permissive society ever ything is allowed - killing, ri ots, the cynica l oppression of 
one country by another, and nobody does  anything about it be cause interference  20might mean world war. I am fa ced with all this and I don' t know what to do; I don't 
know how to live at all. I don't want to live in the midst of such confusion.  
     Krishnamurti: What is it you are as king for - a different life, or for a new life 
which comes about with the understanding of the old life? If you want to live a 
different life without understanding what  has brought about th is confusion, you 
will always be in contradictio n, in conflict, in confusion. And that of course is not a 
new life at all. So are you asking for a new life or for a modified continuity of the 
old one, or to understand the old one?  
     Questioner: I'm not at all sure what  I want but I am begi nning to see what I 
don't want.  
     Krishnamurti: Is wh at you don't want based on your free understanding or on 
your pleasure and pain? Are you judging ou t of your revolt, or do you see the 
causation of this conflict and misery, an d, because you see it, reject it?  
     Questioner: You're asking me too many  things. All I know is  that I want to live 
a different kind of life. I don't know what  it means; I don't know  why I'm seeking it; 
and, as I said, I'm utterly bewildered by it all.  
     Krishnamurti: Your basic question is, isn't it, how are you to  live in this world? 
Before you find out let us first see what this  world is. The world is  not only all that 
surrounds us, it is also our relationsh ip to all these thin gs and people, to 
ourselves, to ideas. That is , our relationship to property , to people, to concepts - 
in fact our relationship to the stream of ev ents which we call life.  This is the world. 
We see division into nationalities, into religious, economic, po litical, social and 
ethnical groups; the whole wo rld is broken up and is as fragmented outwardly as 
its human beings are inwardly. In fac t, this outer fragmentation is the 
manifestation of the human being's inner division.  
     Questioner: Yes, I se e this fragmentation very clear ly, and I am also beginning 
to see that the human being is responsible.   21     Krishnamurti:You  are the human being!  
     Questioner: Then can I live different ly from what I am myself? I'm suddenly 
realizing that if I am to live in a totally different way there must be a new birth in 
me, a new mind and heart, new eyes. And I realize also that this hasn't 
happened. I live the way I am, and the way I am has made life as it is. But where 
does one go from there?  
     Krishnamurti: You don't go anywhere from there! There is no going anywhere. 
The going, or the searching for the ideal, for what we think is better, gives us a 
feeling that we are progressing, that we are moving towards a better world. But 
this movement is no movement at all be cause the end has been projected out of 
our misery, confusion, greed and envy. So this end, whic h is supposed to be the 
opposite of what is, is really the same as what is, it is engendered by what is. 
Therefore it creates the conflict between what is and what sh ould be. This is 
where our basic confusion a nd conflict arises. The end is not over there, not on 
the other side of the wall; the beginning and the end are here.  
     Questioner: Wait a minute, sir, plea se; I don't understand th is at all. Are you 
telling me that the ideal of what should be is the result  of not understanding what 
is? Are you telling me that wh at should be is what is, an d that this mo vement from 
what is to what should be isn' t really a movement at all?  
     Krishnamurti: It is an idea; it is fi ction. If you understand what is, what need is 
there for what should be?  
     Questioner: Is that so? I understand what is. I understand the bestiality of war, 
the horror of killing, and because I understa nd it I have this ideal of not killing. 
The ideal is born out of my understanding of  what is, therefore it  is not an escape. 
Krishnamurti: If you un derstand that killing is terrible do you have to have an ideal 
in order not to kill? Perhaps we are no t clear about the wo rd understanding. 
When we say we underst and something, in that is im plied, isn't it, that we have  22learnt all it has to say? We have explored it and discovered the truth or the 
falseness of it. This implie s also, doesn't it, that this  understanding is not an 
intellectual affair, but that one has felt  it deeply in one' s heart? There is 
understanding only when the mind and the heart are in perfect harmony. Then 
one says "I have under stood this, and finished with it", and it no longer has the 
vitality to breed further conflict. Do we both give the same meaning to that word 
understand?  
     Questioner: I hadn't before, but now I see that what you are saying is true. Yet 
I honestly don't understand, in  that way, the total disorder  of the world, which, as 
you so rightly pointed out, is my own disorder. How ca n I understand it? How can 
I completely learn about the disorder, t he entire disorder and confusion of the 
world, and of myself?  
     Krishnamurti: Do not use the word how, please.  
     Questioner: Why not?  
     Krishnamurti: The how implies that somebody is going to give you a method, a 
recipe, which, if you practise i t, will bring about understanding. Can 
understanding ever come about through a method ? Understanding means love 
and the sanity of the mind. And love cannot be practise d or taught. The sanity of 
the mind can only come about when there is clear perception, seeing things as 
they are unemotionally, not sentimentally . Neither of these two things can be 
taught by another, nor by a system inve nted by yourself or by another.  
     Questioner: You are too persuasive, sir, or is it perhaps that you are too 
logical? Are you trying to influence me to see things as you see them?  
     Krishnamurti: God forbid! Influenc e in any form is destructive of love. 
Propaganda to make the mi nd sensitive, alert, will only make it dull and 
insensitive. So we are in no way trying to  influence you or pers uade you, or make 
you depend. We are only poin ting out, exploring together . And to explore together  23you must be free, both of me and of your own prejud ices and fears. Otherwise 
you go round and round in ci rcles. So we must go back  to our original question: 
how am I to live in this wo rld? To live in this world we  must deny the world. By 
that we mean: deny the ideal, the war, the fragmentation, th e competition, the 
envy and so on. We don't mean deny the world as a schoolboy revolts against his 
parents. We mean deny it because we understand it. This understanding is 
negation.  
     Questioner: I am out of my depth.  
     Krishnamurti: You said you do not wa nt to live in the confusion, the dishonesty 
and ugliness of this world. So you deny it. Bu t from what backgr ound do you deny 
it, why do you deny it? Do yo u deny it because you want to live a peaceful life, a 
life of complete security and enclosure, or do you deny it because you see what it 
actually is? Questioner: I think I deny it  because I see around me what is taking 
place. Of course my prejudic es and fear are all involved. So it is a mixture of what 
is actually taking plac e and my own anxiety.  
     Krishnamurti: Which predominates, your own anxiety or th e actual seeing of 
what is around you? If fear predominates , then you can't see what is actually 
going on around you, bec ause fear is darkness, an d in darkness you can see 
absolutely nothing. If you realize that, then you can see the world actually as it is, 
then you can see yourse lf actually as you are. Be cause you are the world, and 
the world is you; they are not two separate entities.  
     Questioner: Would you please expl ain more fully what you mean by the world 
is me and I am the world?  
     Krishnamurti: Does this really need  explaining? Do you w ant me to describe in 
detail what you are and show you that it is the same as what the world is? Will 
this description convince yo u that you are the world? Will you be convinced by a 
logical, sequential explanation showing you the cause and t he effect? If you are  24convinced by careful description, will that give yo u understanding?  Will it make 
you feel that you are the world, make yo u feel responsible for the world? It seems 
so clear that our human greed, envy, aggression and violen ce have brought 
about the society in wh ich we live, a legaliz ed acceptance of wh at we are. I think 
this is really sufficiently cl ear and let's not spend any more  time on this issue. You 
see, we don't feel this, we don't love, th erefore there is this  division between me 
and the world. Questioner: May I come back again tomorrow?  
     * * *  
     He came back the next day eagerl y, and there was the bri ght light of enquiry 
in his eyes.  
     Questioner: I want, if you are willing,  to go further into this question of how I 
am to live in this world. I do now underst and, with my heart and my mind, as you 
explained yesterday, the utter importance of ideals. I had quite a long struggle 
with it and have come to s ee the triviality of ideals. You are saying, aren't you, 
that when there are no ideals or esc apes there is only the past, the thousand 
yesterdays which make up the "me"? So when I ask: How am I to live in this 
world?" I have not only put a wron g question, but I have also made a 
contradictory statement, for I have placed the world and the "me"  in opposition to 
each other. And this contradiction is what  I call living. So when I ask the question, 
"How am I to live in th is world?" I am really trying to  improve this contradiction, to 
justify it, to modify it, because that's all I know; I don't kn ow anything else.  
     Krishnamurti: This then is the questi on we have now: must living always be in 
the past, must all activity spring from the past, is all relationship the outcome of 
the past, is living the comple x memory of the past? That is all we know - the past 
modifying the present. And the future is the outcome of this past acting through 
the present. So the past, the present and t he future are all the past. And this past 
is what we call living. The mi nd is the past, the brain is  the past, the feelings are 
the past, and action coming fr om these is the positive ac tivity of the known. This  25whole process is your life and all the rela tionship and activity  that you know. So 
when you ask how you are to live in this world you are asking for a change of 
prisons.  
     Questioner: I don't mean that. What  I mean is: I see ve ry clearly that my 
process of thinking and doi ng is the past working through the present to the 
future. This is all I know, and that's a fact. And I rea lize that unless there is a 
change in this structure I am caught in it, I am of it. From  this the question 
inevitably arises: how am I to change?  
     Krishnamurti: To live in this world sa nely there must be a radical change of the 
mind and of the heart.  
     Questioner: Yes, but what do you mean by change? How am I to change if 
whatever I do is the movement of the past? I can only change myself, nobody 
else can change me. And I don't see what it means - to change.  
     Krishnamurti: So the question "H ow am I to live in this world?" has now 
become "How am I to chan ge?" - bearing in mind th at the how doesn't mean a 
method, but is an enquiry to understand. What is change? Is there any change at 
all? Or can you ask whether there is any change at all only a fter there has been a 
total change and revolution? Let 's begin again to find out  what this word means. 
Change implies a movement from what is to something different. Is this 
something different merely an opposite, or  does it belong to a different order 
altogether? If it is merely an  opposite then it is not di fferent at all, because all 
opposites are mutually  dependent, like hot and cold, high and low. The opposite 
is contained within, and determined by, its opposite; it exists only in comparison, 
and things that are comparative have diff erent measures of the same quality, and 
therefore they are similar. So  change to an opposite is no change at all. Even if 
this going towards what seem s different gives you the fe eling that you are really 
doing something, it is an illusion.   26     Questioner: Let me absorb this for a moment.  
     Krishnamurti: So what are we co ncerned with now? Is it possible to bring 
about in ourselves the birth of a new order altogether th at is not related to the 
past? The past is irrelevant to this enquiry , and trivial, because it is irrelevant to 
the new order.  
     Questioner: How can you say it is trivial and irrelevant? We've been saying all 
along that the past is the issue, and now you say it is irrelevant.  
     Krishnamurti: The past seems to be the only issue because it is the only thing 
that holds our minds and hearts. It alone is important to us. But why do we give 
importance to it? Why is this  little space all-important? If you are totally immersed 
in it, utterly committed to it, then you w ill never listen to change. The man who is 
not wholly committed is the only one capable of listeni ng, enquiring and asking. 
Only then will he be able to  see the triviality of this  little space. So, are you 
completely immersed, or is your head ab ove the water? If your head is above the 
water then you can see that th is little thing is trivial. Th en you have room to look 
around. How deeply are you immersed? Nobody can answer this  for you except 
yourself. in the very asking of this qu estion there is already freedom and, 
therefore, one is not afraid . Then your vision is exte nsive. When this pattern of 
the past holds you complete ly by the throat, then yo u acquiesce, accept, obey, 
follow, believe. It is only when you are awar e that this is not freedom that you are 
starting to climb out of i t. So we are again asking: what is change, what is 
revolution? Change is not a movement from the know n to the known, and all 
political revolutions are that. This kind of change is not what we are talking about. 
To progress from bei ng a sinner to being a saint is  to progress from one illusion 
to another. So now we are free of change  as a movement from this to that.  
     Questioner: Have I really unde rstood this? What am I to do with anger, 
violence and fear when they arise in me? Am I to give  them free reign? How am I  27to deal with them? There must be chan ge there, otherwise I am what I was 
before.  
     Krishnamurti: Is it clear to you th at these things cannot be overcome by their 
opposites? If so, you have only the violence, the envy, the anger, the greed. The 
feeling arises as the result of a challen ge, and then it is na med. This naming of 
the feeling re-establishes it in the old pa ttern. If you do not na me it, which means 
you do not identify yourself with it, then the feeling is  new and it will go away by 
itself. The naming of it strengthens it and gives it a continuity  which is the whole 
process of thought.  
     Questioner: I am being driven into  a comer where I see my self actually as I 
am, and I see how trivial I am. From there what comes next?  
     Krishnamurti: Any movement from  what I am strengthens what I am. So 
change is no movement at a ll. Change is the denial of  change, and now only can 
I put this question: is ther e a change at all? This question can be put only when 
all movement of thought has come to an end, for though t must be denied for the 
beauty of non-change. In the total negation of all moveme nt of thought away from 
what is, is the ending of what is.   28Relationship  
 Questioner: I have come a long way to  see you. Although  I am married and 
have children I have been away from them, wandering, meditating, as a 
mendicant. I have puzzled greatly over this very complicated problem of 
relationship. When I go into a village and they give me food, I am related to the 
giver, as I am related to my wife and ch ildren. In another v illage when somebody 
gives me clothes I am related to the whole factory that produced them. I am 
related to the earth on which I walk, to the tree under which I take shelter, to 
everything. And yet I am alone, isolated. When I am with my wife, I am separate 
even during sex - it  is an act of separa tion. When I go into a temple it is still the 
worshipper being related to the thing he worships: separation again. So in all 
relationships, as I see it, there is this separation, duality, and behind or through it, 
or around it, there is a peculi ar sense of unity. When I see the beggar it hurts me, 
for I am like him and I feel as he feels - lo nely, desperate, sick,  hungry. I feel for 
him, and with him, for his meaningless ex istence. Some rich man comes along in 
his big motor car and gives me a lift, but I feel uncomfortable in  his comp any, yet 
at the same time I feel for him and am re lated to him. So I have meditated upon 
this strange phenomenon of relationsh ip. Can we on this  lovely morning, 
overlooking this deep valley, talk over together this question? Krishnamurti: Is all 
relationship out of this isolation? Can ther e be relationship as long as there is any 
separateness, division ? Can there be relationship if there is no contact, not only 
physical but at every level of our being, with another? One ma y hold the hand of 
another and yet be miles aw ay, wrapped in one's own thoughts and problems. 
One may be in a group and yet be painfully alone. So one asks: can there be any 
kind of relationship with the tree, the fl ower, the human being, or with the skies 
and the lovely sunset, when the mind in it s activities is isol ating itself? And can 
there be any contact ever, wi th anything at all, even  w h e n  t h e  m i n d  i s  n o t  
isolating itself?   29     Questioner: Everything and everyb ody has its own existence. Everything and 
everybody is shrouded in its own existenc e. I can never penetrate this enclosure 
of another's being. However much I love so meone, his existence is separate from 
mine. I can perhaps touch him from the outside, mentally or physically, but his 
existence is his own, and mine is for ever on the outside of it. Similarly he cannot 
reach me. Must we always remain two se parate entities, each in his own world, 
with his own limitations, within the prison of his own consciousness?  
     Krishnamurti: Each lives  within his own tissue, you in yours, he in his. And is 
there any possibility, ever, of  breaking through this tissue?  Is this tissue - this 
shroud, this envelope - the word? Is it ma de up of your concern with yourself and 
his with himself, your desires opposed to his? Is this capsule the past? It is all of 
this, isn't it? It isn't one particular thing but a whole bu ndle which the mind carries 
about. You have your burden, another has his. Can these burdens ever be 
dropped so that the mind meets the mind, the heart me ets the heart? That is 
really the question, isn't it?  
     Questioner: Even if all these burden s are dropped, if that were possible, even 
then he remains in his skin with his thou ghts, and I in mine with my thoughts. 
Sometimes the gap is narro w, sometimes it is wide, but we are always two 
separate islands. The gap seem s to be widest when we ca re most about it and try 
to bridge it.  
     Krishnamurti: You can identify yourself with that villager or with that flaming 
bougainvillaea - which is a mental trick to  pretend unity. Identification with 
something is one of the most hypocritical st ates - to identify on eself with a nation, 
with a belief and yet remain alone is a fa vourite trick to cheat loneliness. Or you 
identify yourself so completely with your belief that you are that belief, and this is 
a neurotic state. Now let's put away this urge to be identified with a person or an 
idea or a thing. That  way there is no harmony, unity or love. So ou r next question 
is: can you tear through th e envelope so that there is no more envelope? Then  30only would ther e be a possibility of to tal contact. How is one to tear through the 
envelope? The "how" doesn't mean a meth od, but rather an enquiry which might 
open the door.  
     Questioner: Yes, no other contact ca n be called relationship at all, though we 
say it is.  
     Krishnamurti: Do we tear the envelo pe bit by bit or cut th rough it immediately? 
If we tear it bit by bit, which is what analysts sometimes clai m to do, the job is 
never done. It is not through time that  you can break down this separation.  
     Questioner: Can I enter into the en velope of another? A nd isn't his envelope 
his very existence, his heartbeats and hi s blood, his feelings and his memories?  
     Krishnamurti: Are you not the very envelope itself?  
     Questioner: Yes.  
     Krishnamurti: The very movement to tear through the other envelope, or 
extend outside of your own,  is the very affirmation an d the action of your own 
envelope: you are the envelope. So you are the observ er of the envelope, and 
you are also the envelope itself. In this case you are the observer and the 
observed: so is he, and that's how we remain. And you try to reach him and he 
tries to reach you. Is this possible? Yo u are the island surr ounded by seas, and 
he is also the island surrounded by seas. You see that  you are both the island 
and the sea; there is no di vision between them; you are the entire earth with the 
sea. Therefore there is no division as the island and the sea. The other person 
doesn't see this. He is the island surrounde d by sea; he tries to reach you, or, if 
you are foolish enough, you may try to reac h him. Is that possible? How can there 
be a contact between a man who is free and another who is bound? Since you 
are the observer and the observed, you are the whole movement of the earth and 
the sea. But the other, wh o doesn't understand  this, is still the island surrounded 
by water. He tries to re ach you and is everlastingl y failing because he maintains  31his insularity. It is only when he leaves it  and is, like you, op en to the movement 
of the skies, the earth, and the sea, that there can be contact.  The one who sees 
that the barrier is himself can no longer have a barrier. Therefore he, in himself, is 
not separate at all. The ot her has not seen that the barrier is himself and so 
maintains the belief in his separateness. How can this man re ach the other? It is 
not possible.  
     * * *  
     Questioner: If we may I should li ke to continue from  where we left off 
yesterday. You were saying that the mind is the make r of the envelope around 
itself, and that this envelope is t he mind. I really don't understand this. 
Intellectually I can agree, but the nature  of perception eludes me. I should like 
very much to understand it - not verbally but  actually feel it - so that there is no 
conflict in my life.  
     Krishnamurti: There is the space between what the mind calls the envelope 
which it has made, and itself. There is  the space between the ideal and the 
action. In these different fragmentations  of space between th e observer and the 
observed, or between different things it observes, is all conflict and struggle, and 
all the problems of life. There is the se paration between this envelope around me 
and the envelope around another. In that  space is all our existence, all our 
relationship and battle.  
     Questioner: When you talk of th e division between the observer and the 
observed do you mean these fragmentations of space in our thinking and in our 
daily actions?  
     Krishnamurti What is this sp ace? There is space be tween you and your 
envelope, the space between him and hi s envelope, and there is the space 
between the two envelopes. Th ese spaces all appear to the observer. What are 
these spaces made of? How do they come into being? Wh at is the quality and the  32nature of these divided sp aces? If we could remove these fragmentary spaces 
what would happen?  
     Questioner: There would then be true  contact on all levels of one's being.  
     Krishnamurti: Is that all?  
     Questioner: There would be no more  conflict, for all conf lict is relationship 
across these spaces.  
     Krishnamurti: Is that all? When this space actually disappea rs - not verbally or 
intellectually - but actually  disappears - there is complete harmony, unity, 
between you and him, betw een you and another. In this harmony you and he 
cease and there is only this vast space which can never be broken up. The small 
structure of the mind co mes to an end, for the mind is fragmentation.  
     Questioner: I really can't understand this at all, though I have a deep feeling 
within me that it is so. I can see that when  there is love this actually takes place, 
but I don't know that love. It' s not with me all the time. It is not in my heart. I see it 
only as if through a misty glas s. I can't honestly grasp it  with all my being. Could 
we, as you suggested, consider what th ese spaces are made of, how they come 
into being?  
     Krishnamurti: Let's be quite sure that we both unders tand the same thing 
when we use the word space. There is the physical space between people and 
things, and there is the psychological space between people  and things. Then 
there is also the space between the idea and the actual. So all this, the physical 
and psychological, is space,  more or less limited an d defined. We are not now 
talking of the physical space. We are talking of the psychological space between 
people and the psychological space in the human being himself, in his thoughts 
and activities. How does this space come about? Is it fi ctitious, illusory, or is it 
real? Feel it, be aware of i t, make sure you haven't just  got a mental image of it, 
bear in mind that the description is never the thing. Be quite sure that you know  33what we are talking about. Be quite aware that this limi ted space, this division, 
exists in you: don't move from there if  you don't understand.  Now how does this 
space come about?  
     Questioner: We see the physical space between things....  
     Krishnamurti: Don't explain anything; just feel your way into it. We are asking 
how this space has come into being. Don' t give an explanation or a cause, but 
remain with this space and feel it. Then  the cause and the description will have 
very little meaning and no value. This space has come into being because of 
thought, which is the "me", the word - which is the whole division. Thought itself is 
this distance, this division. Thought is always breaking itself up into fragments 
and creating division. Though t always cuts up what it observes into fragments 
within space - as you and me, yours and mine, me and my thoughts, and so on. 
This space, which thought has created between what it observes, has become 
real; and it is this space th at divides. Then thought trie s to build a bridge over this 
division, thus playing a trick upon itself all the time, deceiving itself and hoping for 
unity.  
     Questioner: That reminds me of the old statement about thou ght: it is a thief 
disguising himself as a policeman in order to catch the thief.  
     Krishnamurti: Don't bother to qu ote, sir, however ancient it is. We are 
considering what actually is going on. In seeing the truth of the nature of thought 
and its activities, thought becomes quiet.  Thought being quiet, not made quiet, is 
there space?  
     Questioner: It is thought itself whic h now rushes in to an swer this question.  
     Krishnamurti: Exactly! Therefore we do not even ask the question. The mind 
now is completely harmonio us, without fragmentation; the little space has ceased 
and there is only space. When the mind is  completely quiet there is the vastness 
of space and silence. Questioner: So I begin to see that my relationship to  34another is between thought and thought; whatever I answer is the noise of 
thought, and realizing it, I am silent.  
     Krishnamurti: This s ilence is the benediction.   35Conflict  
 Questioner: I find myself in  a great deal of conflict with everything about me; 
and also everything within me  is in conflict. People hav e spoken of divine order; 
nature is harmonious; it s eems that man is the only an imal who violates this 
order, making so much misery for others and for himself. When I wake up in the 
morning I see from my window  little birds fighting with each other, bu t they soon 
separate and fly away, whereas I carry this war with myself  and with others inside 
me all the time; there is no escaping it. I wonder if I can ever  be at peace with 
myself. I must say I should like to find  myself in comple te harmony with 
everything about me and with myself. As one sees fr om this window the quiet sea 
and the light on the water, one has a fee ling deep within oneself that there must 
be a way of living without thes e endless quarrels with on eself and with the world. 
Is there any harmony at all,  anywhere? Or is there on ly everlasting disorder? If 
there is harmony, at what level can it exis t? Or does it only  exist on the top of 
some mountain which the burn ing valleys can never know?  
     Krishnamurti: Can one go from one to the other? Can one  change that which 
is to that which is not? Can dishar mony be transforme d into harmony?  
     Questioner: Is conflict necessary th en? It may perhaps, after all, be the natural 
order of things. Krishnamurti: If one acce pted that, one would have to accept 
everything society st ands for: wars, ambitious competition, an aggressive way of 
life - all the brutal violence of men, insi de and outside of his so-called holy places. 
Is this natural? Will this bring about any unity? Wouldn't it be better for us to 
consider these two facts - the fact of conflict with all its complicated struggles, 
and the fact of the mind  demanding order, harmony , peace, beauty, love?  
     Questioner: I know nothing about harmony. I see it in the heavens, in the 
seasons, in the mathematical order of the universe. But that doesn't give me 
order in my own heart and mind; the absolute order of  mathematics is not my  36order. I have no order, I am in deep disorder. I know ther e are different theories of 
gradual evolution towards the so-called perfection of political utopias and 
religious heavens, but th is leaves me where I ac tually am. The world may 
perhaps be perfect in ten thousand years from now, but in the meantime I'm 
having hell.  
     Krishnamurti: We see the disorder in  ourselves and in society. Both are very 
complex. There are really no answers. One can examine all this very carefully, 
analyse it closely, look for causes of di sorder in oneself and in society, expose 
them to the light and perhap s believe that one will free the mind from them. This 
analytical process is what most people are doin g, intelligently or unintelligently, 
and it doesn't get anybody very far. Man has analysed himself for thousands of 
years, and produced no re sult but literature! The ma ny saints ha ve paralysed 
themselves in concepts and ideological prisons; they too are in conflict. The 
cause of our conflict is this  everlasting duality of desire: the e ndless corridor of 
the opposites creating envy greed ambition aggression, fear, and all the rest of it. 
Now I wonder if there isn't an altogether different approa ch to this problem? The 
acceptance of this struggle  and all our efforts to get  out of it have become 
traditional. The whole approach is traditiona l. In this traditional approach the mind 
operates but, as we see, the traditiona l approach of the mind creates more 
disorder. So the problem is not how to end disorder, but rather whether the mind 
can look at it freed from tradition. And then perhaps there may be no problem at 
all.  
     Questioner: I don't follow you at all.  
     Krishnamurti: There is this fact of di sorder. There is no doub t about it: it is an 
actual fact. The traditional approach to this fact is to analyse i t, to try to discover 
the cause of it and overcome the cause, or  else to invent its opposite and battle 
towards that. This is the traditional appr oach with its disciplines, drills, controls, 
suppressions, sublimations. Man has done this for thou sands upon thousands of  37years; it has led nowhere. Can we abandon  this approach completely and look at 
the problem entirely differently - that is, not try to go beyo nd it, or to resolve it, or 
to overcome it, or to escape fr om it? Can the mind do this.  
     Questioner: Perhaps....  
     Krishnamurti: Don't an swer so quickly! This is a tremendous thing I am asking 
you. From the beginning of time man has trie d to deal with all his problems, either 
by going beyond them, resolv ing them, overcoming them or escaping from them. 
Please do not think you can push all that aside so light ly, simply with a verbal 
agreement. It makes up the very structur e of everybody's mind. Can the mind 
now, understanding all this non-verbally, actually free itself from the tradition? 
This traditional way of dealing with the conflict never solves it, but only adds more 
conflict: being violent, which is conflict, I a dd the additional conflict of trying to 
become non-violent. All social morality and all religious prescriptions are that. Are 
we together?  
     Questioner: Yes.  
     Krishnamurti: Then do you see how far we have come? Having, through 
understanding, repudiated all these tradit ional approaches, what is the actual 
state of the mind now? Because the state of  the mind is far more important than 
the conflict itself.  
     Questioner: I really don't know.  
     Krishnamurti: Why don't you know? Wh y aren't you aware, if you have really 
abandoned the traditional ap proach, of the state of your mind? Wh y don't you 
know? Either you have aba ndoned it or you haven't. If you have, you would know 
it. If you have, then your mind is made innocent to lo ok at the problem. You can 
look at the problem as though for the fi rst time. And if you do this, is there a 
problem of conflict at all? Be cause you look at the proble m with the old eyes it is 
not only strengthened but also  moves in its well-worn pat h. So what is important  38is how you look at the problem - whether yo u look at it with new eyes or old eyes. 
The new eyes are freed from  the conditioned responses to the problem. Even to 
name the problem through recognition is to  approach it in the traditional way. 
Justification, condem nation, or translation of the pr oblem in terms of pleasure and 
pain, are all involved in this habitual traditional approach of doing something 
about it. This is generally called positive action with regard to the problem. But 
when the mind brushes all that aside as being ine ffectual, unintelligent, then it 
has become highly se nsitive, highly ordered, and free.  
     Questioner: You're asking too much of me, I can't do it. I'm incapable of it. 
You're asking me to be superhuman !  
     Krishnamurti: You're making difficu lties for yourself, blocking yourself, when 
you say you must become superhuman. It's nothing of the kind. You keep on 
looking at things with eyes that want to interfere, that want to do something about 
what they see. Stop doing anything about it, for whatever you do belongs to the 
traditional approach. That's al l. Be simple. This is the miracle of perception - to 
perceive with a heart and mind that are co mpletely cleansed of  the past. Negation 
is the most positive action.   39The Religious Life  
 Questioner: I should like to know what  a religious life is. I have stayed in 
monasteries for several mont hs, meditated, led a discip lined life, read a great 
deal. I've been to various te mples, churches and mosque s. I've tried to lead a 
very simple, harmless life, trying not to hurt people or animals. This surely isn't all 
there is to a religious life? I've prac tised yoga, studied Ze n and followed many 
religious disciples. I am, and have alwa ys been, a vegetarian. As you see, I'm 
getting old now, and I've lived with some of the saints in different parts of the 
world, but somehow I feel that all this is only the outskirts of the real thing. So I 
wonder if we can discuss today wh at to you is a religious life.  
     Krishnamurti: A sannyasi came to  see me one day and he was sad. He said 
he had taken a vow of ce libacy and left the world to become a mendicant, 
wandering from village to v illage, but his sexual desire s were so imperious that 
one morning he decided to have his sexual organs surgic ally removed. For many 
months he was in constant pain, but some how it healed, and after many years he 
fully realized what he had d one. And so he came to see me and in that little room 
he asked me what he could do now, having mutilated hi mself, to become normal 
again - not physically, of course, but inwardly. He ha d done this thing because 
sexual activity was considered contrary  to a religious life. It was considered 
mundane, belonging to the world of pleasure, which a real sannyasi must at all 
costs avoid. He said, "Her e I am, feeling completely  lost, deprived of my 
manhood. I struggled so hard  against my sexual desires,  trying to control them, 
and ultimately this terrible thing took pl ace. Now what am I to do? I know that 
what I did was wrong. My en ergy has almost gone and I seem to be ending my 
life in darkness." He held my hand, an d we sat silently for some time.  
     Is this a religious life? Is the denial  of pleasure or beauty a way that leads to a 
religious life? To deny the beauty of the skies and the hills and the human form, will that lead to a religious life? But that is what most saints and monks believe.  40They torture themselves in that belief. Can a tortured, twisted, distorted mind ever 
find what is a religious life? Ye t all religions assert that th e only way to reality or to 
God, or whatever they call it, is through this torture, this dist ortion. They all make 
the distinction between what they call a spiritual or re ligious life and what they call 
a worldly life.  
     A man who lives only for pleasure, with occasional flashes of sorrow and piety, 
whose whole life is given to amusement an d entertainment is, of course, a worldly 
man, although he may also be very clever , very scholarly, and fill his life with 
other people's thoughts or his own. And a man who has a gift and exercises it for 
the benefit of societ y, or for his own pleasure, an d who achieves fame in the 
fulfilment of that gift, such a man, surely, is also worldly.  But it is also worldly to 
go to church, or to the temple or the mosque, to pray, stee ped in prejudice, 
bigotry, utterly unaware of the brutality th at this implies. It is worldly to be 
patriotic, nationalistic, idealistic. The m an who shuts himself up in a monastery - 
getting up at regular hours with a book in  hand, reading and praying - is surely 
also worldly. And the man who goes out to  do good works, whethe r he is a social 
reformer or a missionary, is just like the politician in his concern with the world. 
The division between the re ligious life and the world is the very essence of 
worldliness. The minds of all these peop le - monks, saints, reformers - are not 
very different from the minds of those who are only concerned with the things that 
give pleasure.  
     So it is important not to divide lif e into the worldly and the non-worldly. It is 
important not to make the distinction between the worldly and the so-called 
religious. Without the world of  matter, the material worl d, we wouldn't be here. 
Without the beauty of the sky and the single tree on the hill, without that woman 
going by and that man riding the hors e, life wouldn't be possible. We are 
concerned with the totality of life not a particular part of it which is considered religious in opposition to th e rest. So one begins to se e that a religious life is 
concerned with the whole and not with the particular.   41     Questioner: I understand what you sa y. We have to deal with the totality of 
living; we can't separate the world from the so-called spir it. So the question is: in 
what way can we act religiously with regard to all the things in life?  
     Krishnamurti: What do we mean by acting religiously? Don't you mean a way 
of life in which there is no division - division between the worldly and the religious, 
between what should be an d what shouldn't be, between me and you, between 
like and dislike? This division is conflict. A life of conflict is not  a religious life. A 
religious life is only poss ible when we deeply un derstand conflict. This 
understanding is intelligence. It is this in telligence that acts rightly. What most 
people call intelligence is merely  deftness in some technica l activity, or cunning in 
business or political chicanery. Question er: So my question really means how is 
one to live without conflict, a nd bring about that feeling of true sanctity which is 
not simply emotional piety conditioned by some religio us cage - no matter how 
old and venerated that cage is?  
     Krishnamurti: A man living without to o much conflict in a village, or dreaming 
in a cave on a "sacred"  hillside, is surely not living the religious life that we are 
talking about. To end conflic t is one of the most comp lex things. It needs self-
observation and the sensitivit y of awareness of the outer as well as of the inner. 
Conflict can only end where there is the understanding of the contradiction in 
oneself. This contradiction will  always exist if there is no freedom from the known, 
which is the past. Freedom from the past means living in the no w which is not of 
time, in which there is only this movement of freedom, untouched by the past, by 
the known.  
     Questioner: What do you me an by freedom from the past?  
     Krishnamurti: The past is all our  accumulated memories. These memories act 
in the present and create our hopes an d fears of the future. These hopes and 
fears are the psychological future: without th em there is no future. So the present 
is the action of the past, and the mind is this movement of the past. The past  42acting in the present creates what we call the future. This resp onse of the past is 
involuntary, it is not summoned or invite d, it is upon us before we know it.  
     Questioner: In that case, ho w are we going to be free of it?  
     Krishnamurti: To be aware of this movement without choice - because choice 
again is more of this same movement of the past - is to observe the past in 
action: such observation is not a movement  of the past. To observe without the 
image of thought is action in which th e past has ended. To observe the tree 
without thought is action without the pas t. To observe the acti on of the past is 
again action without the past. The state of seeing is more  important than what is 
seen. To be aware of the past  in that choiceless observ ation is not only to act 
differently, but to be different. In th is awareness memory acts without 
impediment, and efficiently. To be religious  i s  t o  b e  s o  c h o i celessly aware that 
there is freedom from the known even whils t the known acts wher ever it has to.  
     Questioner: But the known, the pas t, still sometimes acts ev en when it should 
not; it still acts to cause conflict.  
     Krishnamurti: To  be aware of this is also to be in  a state of inaction with regard 
to the past which is acting. So freedom from the known is truly the religious life. 
That doesn't mean to wipe out the know n but to enter a different dimension 
altogether from which the known is observe d. This action of seeing choicelessly 
is the action of love. The relig ious life is this action, an d all living is this action, 
and the religious mind is this action. So religion, and the mind, and life, and love, 
are one.   43Seeing The Whole  
 Questioner: When I listen to you I se em to understand what you are talking 
about, not only verbally, but at a much deep er level. I am part of it; I fully grasp 
with my whole being the truth of what yo u say. My hearing is  sharpened, and the 
very seeing of the flowers, the trees, and those mountains wi th snow, makes me 
feel I am part of them. In th is awareness I have no confli ct, no contradiction. it is 
as though I could do anyt hing, and that whatever I did would be true, would not 
bring either conflict or pai n. But unfortunately that st ate doesn't last. Perhaps it 
lasts for an hour or two wh ile I'm listening to  you. When I leave the talks it all 
seems to evaporate and I'm ba ck where I was. I try to be aware of myself; I keep 
remembering the state I was in when I list ened to your talks, keep trying to reach 
it, hold on to it, and this becomes a stru ggle. You have said, "Be aware of your 
conflict, listen to your conflict, see the causes of your conflict, your conflict is 
yourself". I am aware of my conflict, my pain, my sorrow, my confusion, but this 
awareness in no way resolves  these things. On the cont rary, being aware of them 
seems to give them vitality and duration. You talk of choiceless awareness, which 
again breeds another battle in me, for I am full of choice, decisions and opinions. 
I have applied this awareness to a partic ular habit I have, and it has not gone. 
When you are aware of some conflict or  strain, this same  awareness keeps 
looking to see if it has al ready gone. And this  seems to remind you of it, and you 
never shake it off. Krishnamurti: Awarenes s is not a commitment to something. 
Awareness is an observatio n, both outer and inner, in which direction has 
stopped. You are aw are, but the thing of which you are aware is not being 
encouraged or nourished. Aw areness is not concentratio n on something. It is not 
an action of the will choosing what it w ill be aware of, and analysing it to bring 
about a certain result. When  awareness is deliberately focused on a particular 
object, as a conflict, that is the action of will which is concentration. When you 
concentrate - that is, put all your energy and thought with in your chosen frontiers, 
whether reading a book or wa tching your anger - then, in  this exclusion, the thing  44you are concentrating upon is strengthened, nourished.  So here we have to 
understand the nature of awar eness: We have to unders tand what we are talking 
about when we use the word awareness. Now, you can either be aware of a 
particular thing, or be aware of that particul ar as part of the tota l. The particular by 
itself has very little meaning, but when you see th e total, then that  particular has a 
relationship to the whole. Only  in this relationship does the particular have its right 
meaning; it doesn't become all-important, it is not exaggerated. So the real 
question is: does one see the total proces s of life or is one concentrated on the 
particular, thus missing the whole field of life? To be aware of th e whole field is to 
see also the particular, but, at the same ti me, to understand its relationship to the 
whole. If you are angry and are concerned with ending th at anger, then you focus 
your attention on the anger and the wh ole escapes you and the anger is 
strengthened. But anger is interrelated to the whole. So when we separate the 
particular from the whole, the particular breeds its own problems.  
     Questioner: What do you mean by se eing the whole? What is this totality you 
talk about, this extensive aw areness in which the particula r is a detail? Is it some 
mysterious, mystical experience? If so then  we are lost comple tely. Or is this 
perhaps what you are saying, that there is a whole fiel d of existence, of which 
anger is a part, and that to  be concerned with the pa rt is to block out the 
extensive perception? But w hat is this extensive perc eption? I can only see the 
whole through all its particulars. And what whole do you mean ? Are you talking 
about the whole of the mind, or the whole of existence, or the whole of myself, or 
the whole of life? What whole do you mean, and how can I see it?  
     Krishnamurti: The whole field of life: the mind, love, everything which is in life.  
     Questioner: How can I possibly see all that! I can understand that everything I 
see is partial, and that all my awareness is awareness of the particular, and that 
this strengthens the particular.   45     Krishnamurti: Let's put it this way:  do you perceive with your mind and your 
heart separately, or do you see, hear, feel, think, all together, not fragmentarily?  
     Questioner: I don't know what you mean.  
     Krishnamurti: You hear a word, your mind tells you it is an insult, your feelings 
tell you you don't like it, your  mind again intervenes to co ntrol or justify, and so 
on. Once again feeling take s over where the mind has co ncluded. In this way an 
event unleashes a chain-reaction of different parts of your bei ng. What you hear 
had been broken up, made frag mentary, and if you concentrate on one of those 
fragments, you miss the total process of that hearing. Hearing can be 
fragmentary or it can be done with all your being, tota lly. So, by perception of the 
whole we mean perception with  your eyes, your ears, your heart, your mind; not 
perception with each separately. It is givi ng your complete attention. In that 
attention, the particular, such as anger, has a different meaning since it is 
interrelated to many other issues.  
     Questioner: So when you say seeing the whole, you mean seeing with the 
whole of your being; it is  a question of quality not qu antity. Is that correct?  
     Krishnamurti: Yes, precisely. But do you see totally in this way or are you 
merely verbalizing it? Do you see anger with your heart, mind, ears and eyes? Or 
do you see anger as somethin g unrelated to the rest of  you, and therefore of 
great importance? When you give importance to  the whole you do not forget the 
particular.  
     Questioner: But what happ ens to the partic ular, to anger?  
     Krishnamurti: You are aware of ange r with your whole being. If you are, is 
there anger? Inattention is anger, not attention. So a ttention with your entire 
being is seeing the whole, and inattention is seeing the particular. To be aware of 
the whole, and of the particular, and of the relationship between the two, is the  46whole problem. We divide the particular fr om the rest and try to solve it. And so 
conflict increases and there is no way out.  
     Questioner: When you speak then of  seeing only the particular, as anger, do 
you mean looking at it with only one part of your being?  
     Krishnamurti: When you look at the particular with a frag ment of your being, 
the division between that par ticular and the fragment whic h is looking at it grows, 
and so conflict increases. When there is  no division there is no conflict.  
     Questioner: Are you saying that there is no division be tween this anger and 
me when I look at it with all my being?  
     Krishnamurti: Exactly. Is this what you actually are doing, or are you merely 
following the words? What is actually ta king place? This is far more important 
than your question.  
     Questioner: You ask me what is taking  place. I am simply trying to understand 
you.  
     Krishnamurti: Are you trying to u nderstand me or are you seeing the truth of 
what we are talking about, which is inde pendent of me? If yo u actually see the 
truth of what we are talking about, then  you are your own guru and your own 
disciple, which is to understand yoursel f. This understanding  cannot be learnt 
from another.   47Morality  
 Questioner: What is it to be virtuous ? What makes one act righteously? What 
is the foundation of morality?  How do I know virtue with out struggling for it? Is it 
an end in itself?  
     Krishnamurti: Can we discard the morality of society wh ich is really quite 
immoral? Its moralit y has become respectable, appr oved by religious sanctions; 
and the morality of counter-revolution also soon becomes as immoral and 
respectable as that of well-es tablished society. This morality is to go to war, to 
kill, to be aggressive, to seek power, to give hate its place; it is all the cruelty and 
injustice of established authority. This is not moral. But can one actually say that 
it is not moral? Beca use we are part of this society, whether we are conscious of 
it or not. Social morality is our morality, and can we easily put it aside? The ease 
with which we put it aside is the sign of ou r morality - not the effort it costs us to 
put it aside, not the reward, not the punishment for this  effort but th e consummate 
ease with which we discard it. If our beha viour is directed by the environment in 
which we live, controlled and shaped by it, then it is mechanical and heavily 
conditioned. And if our behaviour is the outcome of our own conditioned 
response, is it moral? If your action is based on fear and reward, is it righteous? If 
you behave rightly according to some ideological concep t or principle, can that 
action be regarded as virtuous? So we  must begin to find out how deeply we 
have discarded the morality of  authority, imitation, c onformity and obed- ience. 
Isn't fear the basis of ou r morality? Unless these qu estions are fundamentally 
answered for oneself o ne cannot know what it  is to be truly virtuous. As we said, 
with what ease you come out of this hypocrisy is of the greatest importance. If you merely disregard it, it doesn't indi cate that you are moral: you might be 
merely psychopathic. If you live a life of routine and contentment that is not 
morality either. The morality of the sain t who conforms and follows the well-
established tradition of sain thood is obviously not mora lity. So one can see that  48any conformity to a pattern, whether or not it is sancti oned by tradition, is not 
righteous behaviour. Only out of freedom can come virtue.  
     Can one free oneself with great skill from this network of what is considered 
moral? Skill in action comes with freedom, and so virtue.  
     Questioner: Can I free myself from social morality without fear, with the 
intelligence which is skill? I'm frightened at the very idea of being considered 
immoral by society. The young can do it, but I am middle -aged, and I have a 
family, and in my very blood there is resp ectability, the essenc e of the bourgeois. 
It is there, and I am frightened.  
     Krishnamurti: Either you accept soci al morality or reject it. You can't have it 
both ways. You can't have  one foot in hell and the other in heaven.  
     Questioner: So what am I to do? I see now what morality is, and yet I'm being 
immoral all the time. The older I grow th e more hypocritical I become. I despise 
the social morality, and yet I want it s benefits, its comfort, its security, 
psychological and material, and the elegance of a good addr ess. That is my 
actual, deplorable state.  What am I to do?  
     Krishnamurti: You can't do anything but carry on as you ar e. It is much better 
to stop trying to be mora l, stop trying to be concerned with virtue.  
     Questioner: But I can' t, I want the other! I see the beauty and the vigour of it, 
the cleanliness of it. What I am  holding on to is dirty and ugly, but I can't let it go.  
     Krishnamurti: Then there is no iss ue. You can't have virt ue and respectability. 
Virtue is freedom. Freedom is not an id ea, a concept. When there is freedom 
there is attention, and only in th is attention can goodness flower.   49Suicide  
 Questioner: I would like to  talk about suicide - not be cause of any crisis in my 
own life, nor because I have any reason fo r suicide, but beca use the subject is 
bound to come up when one sees the trag edy of old age - the tragedy of physical 
disintegration, the breaking up of the body, and the loss of real life in people 
when this happens. Is there any reason to prolong life when one reaches that 
state, to go on with the remnants of it? Would it not pe rhaps be an act of 
intelligence to recognise when t he usefulness of life is over?  
     Krishnamurti: If it was intelligence  that prompted you to end life that very 
intelligence would have fo rbidden your body to de teriorate prematurely.  
     Questioner: But is there not a moment when even the intelligence of the mind 
cannot prevent this deterioration? Eventually the body  wears out - how does one 
recognise that time when it comes?  
     Krishnamurti: We ought to go into this rather deeply. Th ere are several things 
involved in it, aren't there? The deterio ration of the body, of the organism, the 
senility of the mind, and the utter incapacity that br eeds resistance. We abuse the 
body endlessly thro ugh custom, taste and negligence. Taste dictates - and the 
pleasure of it controls an d shapes the activity of t he organism. When this takes 
place, the natural intelligence  of the body is destroyed.  In magazines one sees an 
extraordinary variety of food, beautifully coloured, appealing to  your pleasures of 
taste, not to what is beneficial for the body. So from  youth onwards you gradually 
deaden and destroy the instrument which should be highly sensitive, active, 
functioning like a perfect mach ine. That is part of it, and then there is the mind 
which for twenty, thirty  or eighty years has lived in constant battle and resistance. 
It knows only contradiction and  conflict - emotional or in tellectual. Every form of 
conflict is not only a distortion but brings  with it destruction. These then are some  50of the basic inner and outer  factors of deterioration - the perpetually sell-centred 
activity with its isolating processes.  
     Naturally there is the physical wear ing out of the body as well as the unnatural 
wearing out. The body loses its capacitie s and memories, and senility gr adually 
takes over. You ask, sh ould not such a person commit su icide, take a pill that will 
put him out? Who is asking the question - the senile, or those who are watching 
the senility with sorrow, with despair and fear of their own deterioration?  
     Questioner: Well, obviously the questi on from my point of view is motivated by 
distress at seeing senility in other people, for it has not presumably  set in in 
myself yet. But isn't there al so some action of intelli gence which sees ahead into 
a possible breakdown of the body and asks the question whether it is not simply a 
waste to go on once the or ganism is no longer ca pable of intelligent life?  
     Krishnamurti: Will the doctors a llow euthanasia, will the doctors or the 
government permit the patient to commit suicide? Questioner: That surely is a 
legal, sociological or in some people's mind s, a moral question, but that isn't what 
we are discussing here, is it? Aren't we as king whether the individual has the right 
to end his own life, not whet her society will permit it?  
     Krishnamurti: You are asking whether  one has the right to take one's own life - 
not only when one is senile or has become awar e of the approach of senility, but 
whether it is morally right to  commit suicide at any time?  
     Questioner: I hesitate to bring morali ty into it because that is a conditioned 
thing. I was attempting to ask the question on a stra ight issue of intelligence. 
Fortunately at the moment the issue does not confront  me personally so I am 
able to look at it, I think, fairly dispassionately; but as an exercise in human 
intelligence, what is the answer?  
     Krishnamurti: You are saying, can an intelligent man commi t suicide? Is that 
it?   51     Questioner: Or, can suicide be the action of an intelligent man, given certain 
circumstances?  
     Krishnamurti: It is the same thing. Suicide comes, after all, either from 
complete despair, brought ab out through deep frustration,  or from insoluble fear, 
or from the awareness of the meaninglessness of a certain way of living.  
     Questioner: May I interr upt to say that this is gener ally so, but I am trying to 
ask the question outside any motivation. Wh en one arrives at the point of despair 
then there is a tremendous motive involved  and it is hard to separate the emotion 
from the intelligence; I am trying to stay  within the realm of  pure intelligence, 
without emotion.  
     Krishnamurti: You are saying, does  intelligence allow any form of suicide? 
Obviously not.  
     Questioner: Why not?  
     Krishnamurti: Really one has to understand this word  intelligence. Is it 
intelligence to allow the b ody to deteriorate through custom, through indulgence, 
through the cultivation of tast e, pleasure and so on? Is th at intelligence, is that the 
action of intelligence?  
     Questioner: No; but if one has arrived at a point in life where there may have 
been a certain amount of un intelligent use of the body which has not yet had any 
effect on it, one can't go ba ck and re-live one's life.  
     Krishnamurti: Therefore, become aw are of the destructive nature of the way 
we live and put an end to it immediately,  not at some future date. The act of 
immediacy in front of danger is an act of sanity, of intelligence; and the postponement as well as the pursuit of pl easure indicate lack of intelligence.  
     Questioner: I see that.   52     Krishnamurti: But don't you also see something quite factual and true, that this 
isolating process of thought with its self-centred activi ty is a form of suicide? 
Isolation is suicide, whether it is the isolation of a nation or of a religious 
organization, of a family or  of a community. You are already caught in that trap 
which will ultimately lead to suicide.  
     Questioner: Do you mean the individual or the group?  
     Krishnamurti: The individual as well as the group. You are already caught in 
the pattern.  
     Questioner: Which will ultimately  lead to suicide? Bu t everybody doesn't 
commit suicide!  
     Krishnamurti: Quite right, but the el ement of the desire to escape is already 
there - to escape from facing facts, from facing "what is", an d this escape is a 
form of suicide.  
     Questioner: This, I think, is the crux  o f  w h a t  I  a m  t r y i n g  t o  a s k ,  b e c a u s e  i t  
would seem from what you ha ve just said that suicide is an escape. Obviously it 
is, ninety-nine times out of a hundred, but can there not al so be - and this is my 
question - can there not also  be a suicide that is not an escape, that is not an 
avoidance of what you call the "what is", but is on the contrary a response of 
intelligence to "what is"? On e can say that many  kinds of neuros is are forms of 
suicide; what I am trying to ask is whether suicide can ever be other than a 
neurotic response? Cannot it also be the response of facing a fact, of human 
intelligence acting on an unten able human condition?  
     Krishnamurti: When you use the word s "intelligence" and "untenable condition" 
it is a contradiction. The two are in contradiction.   53     Questioner: You have said that if one is facing a precipice, or a deadly snake 
about to strike, intelligence  dictates a certain action , which is an action of 
avoidance.  
     Krishnamurti: Is it an action of  avoidance or an act of intelligence?  
     Questioner: Can they not be the same sometimes? If a car comes at me on 
the highway and I avoid it....  
     Krishnamurti: That is an act of intelligence.  
     Questioner: But it is also  an act of avoiding the car.  
     Krishnamurti: But that  is the act of intelligence.  
     Questioner: Exactly. Theref ore, is there not a corollary in  
     living when the thing confronting you is insolu ble and deadly?  
     Krishnamurti: Then you leave it, as yo u leave the precipice: step away from it.  
     Questioner: In that case th e stepping away implies suicide.  
     Krishnamurti: No, the suic ide is an act of unintelligence.  
     Questioner: Why? Krishnam urti: I am showing it to you.  
     Questioner: Are you saying that an act of suicide is cate gorically, inevitably, a 
neurotic response to life?  
     Krishnamurti: Obviously. It is an act of unintelligence; it is an act which 
obviously means you have come to a poin t where you are so completely isolated 
that you don't se e any way out.   54     Questioner: But I am trying for the purpose of this discussion to assume that 
there is no way out of the predicament, that one is not acting out of the motive of 
avoidance of suffering, that it is not stepping aside from reality.  
     Krishnamurti: Is there in life an o ccurrence, a relationship , an incident from 
which you cannot step aside?  
     Questioner: Of course, there are many.  
     Krishnamurti: Many? Bu t why do you insist that suic ide is the only way out?  
     Questioner: If one has a deadly disease there is no escaping it.  
     Krishnamurti: Be careful now, be careful of what we are saying. If I have 
cancer, and it is going to finish me, and  the doctor says, "Well, my friend, you 
have got to live with it", what  am I to do - commit suicide?  
     Questioner: Possibly. Krishnamurti: We are discussing th is theoretically. If I 
personally had terminal cancer, then I woul d decide, I would consider what to do. 
It wouldn't be a theoretical question. I wo uld then find out what was the most 
intelligent thing to do.  
     Questioner: Are you sa ying that I may not ask this question theoretically, but 
only if I am actually in that position?  
     Krishnamurti: That is right. Then you will act according to  your conditioning, 
according to your intelligence , according to your way of life. If your way of life has 
been avoidance and escape, a neurotic business, then obviously you take a 
neurotic attitude and action. But if you ha ve led a life of real intelligence, in the 
total meaning of that word, then that intelligence will operate when there is 
terminal cancer. Then I may pu t up with it; then I may sa y that I will live the few 
more months or y ears left to me.  
     Questioner: Or you may not say that.   55     Krishnamurti: Or I may not say that; but don't let us say that suicide is 
inevitable.  
     Questioner: I never said that; I ask ed if under certain stringent circumstances, 
such as terminal cancer, suicide could possibly be an intelligent response to the 
situation.  
     Krishnamurti: You see, there is something extraordinar y in this; life has 
brought you great happiness,  life has brought you extr aordinary beauty, life has 
brought you great benef its, and you went with it all. Equally, when you were 
unhappy you went with it, which is part of intelligence: now yo u come to terminal 
cancer and you say, "I can not bear it any longer, I mu st put an end to life." Why 
don't you move with it, live with it, find out about it as you go along?  
     Questioner: In other words, there is no reply to this question until you are in 
the situation.  
     Krishnamurti: Ob viously. But you see that is why it  is very important, I feel, that 
we should face the fact, face "what is", from mom ent to moment, not theorize 
about it. If someone is ill,  desperately ill with cancer, or has become completely 
senile - what is the most intelligent thing to do, not for a mere observer like me, 
but for the doctor, the wife or the daughter?  
     Questioner: One cannot really answer  that, because it is a problem for another 
human being.  
     Krishnamurti: That's just i t, that is just what I am saying.  
     Questioner: And one hasn't the right, it would seem to me, to decide about the 
life or death of an other human being.  
     Krishnamurti: But we do. All the tyrannies do. And tr adition does; tradition says 
you must live this way, you mustn't live that way.   56     Questioner: And it is also becoming a tradition to ke ep people alive beyond 
the point where nature would have given in . Through medical sk ill people are kept 
alive - well, it's hard to define what is  a natural condition - but it seems most 
unnatural to survive for as long as many people do today. But that is a different 
question.  
     Krishnamurti: Yes, an entirely di fferent question. The real question is, will 
intelligence allow suicide - even though doctors have said one has an incurable 
disease? One cannot poss ibly tell another what to do in this matter. It is for the 
human being who has th e incurable disease to act acco rding to his intelligence. If 
he is at all intelligent - wh ich means that he has lived  a life in which there has 
been love, care, sensitivity and gentleness - then such a person, at the moment 
when it arises, will act according to the intelligence which has operated in the 
past.  
     Questioner: Then this whole conv ersation is in a wa y meaningless because 
that is what would have ha ppened anyway - because pe ople would in evitably act 
according to what has happen ed in the past. They will ei ther blow their brains out 
or sit and suffer until they die,  or something in between.  
     Krishnamurti: No, it hasn't been  meaningless. Listen to this; we have 
discovered several th ings - primarily that to live with intelligence is the most 
important thing. To live a way of life which is supremely intelligent demands an 
extraordinary alertness of mind and body, and we've de stroyed the alertness of 
the body by unnatural ways of  living. We are also destro ying the mind, the brain, 
through conflict, through cons tant repression, constant explosion and violence. 
So if one lives a way of life that is a ne gation of all this, th en that life, that 
intelligence, when confront ed with incurable diseas e will act in the moment 
rightly. Questioner: I see th at I have asked you a quest ion about suicide and have 
been given an answ er on how to live rightly.   57     Krishnamurti: It is the only way. A man jumping over the bridge doesn't ask, 
"Shall I commit suicide?" He is doing it; it is finished. Whereas we, sitting in a safe 
house or in a laboratory, asking whether a man should  or should not commit 
suicide, has no meaning.  
     Questioner: So it is  a question one cannot ask.  
     Krishnamurti: No, it must be aske d - whether one should or should not commit 
suicide. It must be asked, but find out what is behind the question, what is 
prompting the questioner, what  is making him want to co mmit suicide. We know a 
man who has never co mmitted suicide, although he is  always threatening to do 
so, because he is complete ly lazy. He doesn't want to do a thing, he wants 
everybody to support him; such a man has already committed suicide. The man 
who is obstinate, suspicious, greedy for power and position, has also inwardly 
committed suicide. He lives behind a wall of images. So any man who lives with 
an image of himself, of his environment, his ecology, his political power or 
religion, is already finished.  
     Questioner: It would seem to me that  what you are saying is that any life that 
is not lived directly....  
     Krishnamurti: Directly and intelligently.  
     Questioner: Outside the shadows of  images, of conditio ning, of thinking.... 
Unless one lives that way, one's life is a kind of low-key existence.  
     Krishnamurti: Of course it is. Look at most people; they are living behind a wall 
- the wall of their knowledge, their desi res, their ambitious drives. They are 
already in a state of neurosis and that neurosis gives them a certain security, 
which is the security of suicide.  
     Questioner: The security of suicide!   58     Krishnamurti: Like a singer, for ex ample; to him the vo ice is the greatest 
security, and when that fails he  is ready to commit suicide.  What is really exciting 
and true is to find out for oneself a wa y of life that is highly sensitive and 
supremely intelligent; and this is not possible if there is fear, anxiety, greed, envy, 
the building of images or the living in religious isolation. That isolation is what all 
religions have supplied: the believer is definitely on the threshold of suicide. 
Because he has put all his fait h in a belief, when that belief is questi oned he is 
afraid and is ready to ta ke on another belief, another image, commit another 
religious suicide. So, c an a man live without any im age, without any pattern, 
without any time-sense? I don't mean livin g in such a way as not to care what 
happens tomorrow or what ha ppened yesterday, That is not living. There are 
those who say, "Take the pres ent and make the best of i t; that is also an act of 
despair. Really one should not ask whether or not it  is right to co mmi t suici de; 
one should ask what brings  about the state of mind that has no hope - though 
hope is the wrong word because hope im plies a future; one should ask rather, 
how does a life come about th at is without time? To live without time is really to 
have this sense of great lo ve, because love is not of time, love is not something 
that was or will be; to explor e this and live with it is the real question. Whether to 
commit suicide or not is the question of  a man who is already partially dead. 
Hope is the most dreadful th ing. Wasn't it Dante who said, "Leave hope behind 
when you enter the Inferno" ? To him, paradise was hope, that's horrible.  
     Questioner: Yes, hope is its own inferno.   59Discipline  
 Questioner: I've been brought up in a ve ry restricted environment, in strict 
discipline, not only as to outward behaviour but also I was taught to discipline 
myself, to control my thoughts and appe tites and to do certai n things regularly. 
The result is that I find myself so hedged  about that I can't do anything easily, 
freely and happily. When I see what is goi ng on around me in this permissive 
society - the sloppiness, the dirt, the casual beha viour, the indifference to 
manners - I'm shocked, althou gh at the same time I secret ly desire to do some of 
these things myself. Discipline imposed certain values though; it brought with it 
frustrations and distortions,  but surely some discipline is necessary - for instance, 
to sit decently, to eat properly, to speak with care? Without discipline one can't perceive the beauties of music or lit erature or painting. Good manners and 
training reveal a great many nuances in  daily social commerce. When I observe 
the modern generation they have the beauty of youth, but without discipline it will 
soon fade away and t hey will become rather tireso me old men and women. There 
is a tragedy in all this. You see a young man, supple, eager, beautiful with clear 
eyes and a lovely smile, and a few years later you see hi m again and he is almost 
unrecognizable - sloppy, callous, indifferent, full of platitudes, highly respectable, 
hard, ugly, closed and sentimental. Sure ly discipline would have saved him. I, 
who have been disciplined almost out of existence, often wonder where the 
middle way is between this permissive society and the culture in which I was 
brought up. Isn't there a wa y to live without the distor tion and suppression of 
discipline, yet to be highly di sciplined within oneself?  
     Krishnamurti: Disciplin e means to learn, not to conform, not to suppress, not to 
imitate the pattern of what accepted auth ority considers noble. This is a very 
complex question for in it ar e involved several th ings: to learn, to be austere, to 
be free, to be sensitive, and to see the beauty of love.   60     In learning there is no accumulati on. Knowledge is different from learning. 
Knowledge is accumulation, conclusions, formulas, but learning is a constant 
movement, a movement without a centre, without a beginni ng or an en d. To learn 
about oneself there must be no accumulation in one's learning: if there is, it is not 
learning about oneself but merely adding  to one's accumula ted knowledge of 
oneself. Learning is the freedo m of perception, of seeing . And you cannot learn if 
you are not free. So this very learning is its own discipline - you don't have to 
discipline yourself and then learn. Therefore discipline is freedom. This denies all 
conformity and control, for control is t he imitation of a pattern. A pattern is 
suppression, suppression of "what is", and the learning about "what is" is denied 
when there is a formula of what is good  and what is bad. The learning about 
"what is" is the freedom from "what is".  So learning is th e highest form of 
discipline. Learning demands intelligence and sensitivity.  
     The austerity of the priest and the monk is harsh. They deny certain of their 
appetites but not others whic h custom has condoned. The saint is the triumph of 
harsh violence. Austerity is  generally identified with  self-denial through the 
brutality of discipline, drill and conformity. The saint is trying to break a record like 
the athlete. To see the falseness of this brings about its own austerity. The saint 
is stupid and shoddy. To see this is intelligence. Su ch intelligence will not go off 
the deep end to th e opposite extreme. Intelligen ce is the sensitivity which 
understands, and therefore avoids, the extremes. But it is not the prudent 
mediocrity of remaining half-way between the two. To perceive all this clearly is to 
learn about it. To learn ab out it there must be freedo m from all conclusions and 
bias. Such conclusions and bias are obser vation from a centre, the self, which 
wills and directs.  
     Questioner: Aren't you simply sa ying that to look pr operly you must be 
objective?   61     Krishnamurti: Yes, but the word ob jective is not enough. What we are talking 
about is not the harsh object iveness of the microscope, but a state in which there 
is compassion, sensitivity and depth. Discipline, as we said, is learning, and 
learning about austerity does not bring about  violence to oneself or to another. 
Discipline, as it is general ly understood, is the act of  will, which is violence.  
     People throughout the world seem to think that freedom is the fruit of 
prolonged discipline. To see clearly is its own discipline. To see clearly there 
must be freedom, not a controlled vision . So freedom is not at the end of 
discipline, but the understan ding of freedom is its ow n discipline. The two go 
together inseparably: when you separate them there is conflict. To overcome that 
conflict, the action of will comes into bein g and breeds more co nflict. This is an 
endless chain. So freedom is  at the beginning and not at the end: the beginning is 
the end. To learn ab out all this is its own discipline. Learning itself demands 
sensitivity. If you are not sensitive to yo urself - to your environment, to your 
relationships - if you are not  sensitive to what is ha ppening round you, in the 
kitchen or in the world, then however much you discipline yourself you only 
become more and more insens itive, more and more self-c entred - and this breeds 
innumerable problems. To learn is to be sensitive to yourself and to the world 
outside you, for the world ou tside is you. If you are sens itive to yourself you are 
bound to be sensitive to th e world. This sensitivity is the highest form of 
intelligence. It is not the sens itivity of a specialist - the doctor, the scientist or the 
artist. Such fragmentation does  not bring sensitivity.  
     How can one love if there is no sensitivity? Sentimenta lity and emotionalism 
deny sensitivity because they  are terribly cruel; they ar e responsible for wars. So 
discipline is not the drill of the sergeant  - whether in the parade-ground or in 
yourself - which is the will. Learning a ll day long, and during sleep, has its own 
extraordinary discipline which is as gentle as the new spring leaf and as swift as 
the light. In this there is love. Love has its own discip line, and the beauty of it  62escapes a mind that is dril led, shaped, controlled, tortured. Without such a 
discipline the mind cannot go very far.   63What Is  
 Questioner: I have read a great deal of philosophy, psyc hology, religion and 
politics, all of which to a greater or lesser degree are co ncerned with human 
relationships. I have also read your books which all de al with thought and ideas, 
and somehow I'm fed up with it all. I have swum in an ocean of words, and 
wherever I go there are more words - an d actions derived from those words are 
offered to me: advice, exhortations, prom ises, theories, analyses, remedies. Of 
course one sets all these as ide - you yourself have rea lly done so; but for most of 
those who have read you, or heard you, what you say is just words. There may 
be people for whom all this is more than wo rds, for whom it is utterly real, but I'm 
talking about the rest of us. I'd like to go beyond the word, beyond the idea, and 
live in total relationship to a ll things. For after all, that is life. You have said that 
one has to be a teacher and a pupil to  oneself. Can I live in the greatest 
simplicity, without principles , beliefs, and ideals? Can I live freely, knowing that I 
am enslaved by the world? Crises don't knock on the door before they appear: 
challenges of everyday life are there bef ore you are aware of them. Knowing all 
this, having been involved in many of these things, chasing various phantoms, I 
ask myself how I can live rightly and with love, clarity and effortless joy. I'm not 
asking how to live, but to live: the how denies the actual living itself. The nobility 
of life is not practising nobility. Krishnamurti: After stating all this, where are you? 
Do you really want to live wi th benediction, wi th love? If you do, then where is the 
problem?  
     Questioner: I do want  to, but that doesn't  get me anywhere. I' ve wanted to live 
that way for years, but I can't.  
     Krishnamurti: So though you deny the ideal, the belief, the directive, you are 
very subtly and deviously asking the same  thing which everybod y asks: this is the 
conflict between the "what is" and the "what should be".   64     Questioner: Even without the "what should be", I see th at the "what is" is 
hideous. To deceive myself  into not seeing it would be much worse still.  
     Krishnamurti: If you see "what is " then you see the uni verse, and denying 
"what is" is the origin of co nflict. The beauty of the univer se is in the "what is; and 
to live with "what is" with out effort is virtue.  
     Questioner: The "what is" also incl udes confusion, viol ence, every form of 
human aberration. To live with that is what you call virt ue. But isn't it callousness 
and insanity? Perfection doesn't consist simply in dropping all ideals! Life itself 
demands that I live it beautif ully, like the eagle in  the sky: to live the miracle of life 
with anything less than total beauty is unacceptable.  
     Krishnamurti: Then live it! Questioner: I can't, and I don't.  
     Krishnamurti: If you can't, then live in confusion; don't battle with it. Knowing 
the whole misery of it, live with it: that is "what is". And to live with it without 
conflict frees us from it.  
     Questioner: Are you saying that our only fault is to be self-critical?  
     Krishnamurti: Not at all. You are not sufficiently critical. You go only so far in 
your self-criticism. The very entity that criticizes must be criticized, must be 
examined. If the examination is comparative,  examination by yardstick, then that 
yardstick is the ideal. If there is no yardstic k at all - in other words, if there is no 
mind that is always compar ing and measuring - you ca n observe the "what is", 
and then the "what is" is no longer the same.  
     Questioner: I observe myself wi thout a yardstick, and I'm still ugly.  
     Krishnamurti: All examination means th ere is a yardstick. Bu t is it possible to 
observe so that there is only observation,  seeing, and nothing el se - so that there 
is only perception without a perceiver?   65     Questioner: What do you mean?  
     Krishnamurti: There is looking. The assessment of the looking is interference, 
distortion in the looking: that is not lookin g; instead it is evalua tion of looking - the 
two are as different as chal k and cheese. Is there a perception of yourself without 
distortion, only an absolute percep tion of yourself as you are?  
     Questioner: Yes.  
     Krishnamurti: In that perception is there ugliness?  
     Questioner: There is no ugliness in th e perception, only in what is perceived.  
     Krishnamurti: The way you perceive  is what you are. Righteousness is in 
purely looking, which is attention without the distortion of measure and idea. You 
came to enquire how to live beautifully, wi th love. To look without distortion is 
love, and the action of that perception is  the action of virt ue. That clarity of 
perception will act all the time in living. That  is living like the eagl e in the sky; that 
is living beauty an d living love.   66The Seeker  
 Questioner: What is it I'm seeking?  I really don't know, but there is a 
tremendous longing in me for something mu ch more than comfort, pleasure and 
the satisfaction of fulfilment. I happen to have had all these things, but this is 
something much more - some thing at an unfathomable dept h that is crying to be 
released, trying to tell me something. I've had this feeling for many years but 
when I examine it I don't seem to be able to touch it. Yet it is always there, this 
longing to go beyond the mountains and the skies to find something. But perhaps 
this thing is there right in front of me, on ly I don't see it. Don't tell me how to look: 
I've read many of your writings and I kn ow what you mean. I want to reach out my 
hand and take this thing very simply, kn owing very well that I cannot hold the 
wind in my fist. It is said that if you operate on a tumour nea tly you can pluck it 
out in one pocket, intact. In the same wa y I should like to ta ke this whole earth, 
the heavens and the skies an d the seas in one moveme nt, and come upon that 
blessedness on the instant. Is this at all possible? How am I to cross to the other 
shore without taking a boat a nd rowing across the waters? I feel that's the only 
way.  
     Krishnamurti: Yes, that's the only way - to find on eself strangely and 
unaccountably on the other shor e, and from there to live, act and do everything 
that one does in daily life.  
     Questioner: Is it only for the few? Is  it for me? I really don't know what to do. 
I've sat silent; I've studied, examined, di sciplined myself, rath er intelligently I 
think, and of course I've long ago di scarded the temples, the shrines and the 
priests. I refuse to go from  one system to another; it is  all too futile. So you see I 
have come here with complete simplicity.  
     Krishnamurti: I wonder  if you really are so simple  as you think! From what 
depth are you asking this question, and with what love and  beauty? Can your  67mind and heart receive this? Are they se nsitive to the slightest whisper of 
something that comes unexpectedly?  
     Questioner: If it is as  subtle as all that, how true is it, and how real? Intimations 
of such subtlety are usually  fleeting and unimportant.  
     Krishnamurti: Are they? Must ever ything be written out on the blackboard? 
Please, sir, let us find out whether our minds and hearts are really capable of 
receiving immensity, and not just the word.  
     Questioner: I really don't know, that's  my problem. I've done almost everything 
fairly intelligently, putting as ide all the obvious stupiditie s of nationality, organized 
religion, belief - this endless passage of  nothings. I think I have compassion, and 
I think my mind can grasp the subtleties of life, but that  surely is not enough? So 
what is needed? What have I to do or not to do?  
     Krishnamurti: Doing nothing is far more important than doing something. Can 
the mind be completely inactive, and ther eby be supremely active? Love is not 
the activity of thought; it is not the action of good behaviour or social 
righteousness. As you cannot cultivate it, you can do nothing about love.  
     Questioner: I understand what you mean when you say th at inaction is the 
highest form of action - which doesn't mean to do nothing. But somehow I cannot 
grasp it with my heart. Is it  perhaps only because my he art is empty, tired of all 
action, that inaction seems to have an appeal? No. I come back to my original 
feeling that there is this thing of love, and I know, too, that it is the only thing. But 
my hand is still empty afte r I have said that.  
     Krishnamurti: Does this  mean that you are no longer  seeking, no longer saying 
to yourself secretly: "I must reach, atta in, there is something beyond the furthest 
hills?"   68     Questioner: You mean I must give up this feeling I have had for so long that 
there is something beyond all the hills?  
     Krishnamurti: It is no t a question of giving up an ything, but, as we said just 
now, there are only these two things: love, and the mind that is  empty of thought. 
If you really have finished, if you really have shut the door on  all the stupidities 
which man in his search for something has put together, if you really have 
finished with all these, then, are these things - love and the empty mind - just two 
more words, no different from any other ideas?  
     Questioner: I have a deep feeling that  they are not, but I am  not sure of it. So 
again I ask what I am to do. Krishnamu r t i :  D o  y o u  k n o w  w h a t  i t  m e a n s  t o  
commune with what we have just said about love and the mind?  
     Questioner: Yes, I think so.  
     Krishnamurti: I wonder if you do. If there is communion with these two things 
then there is nothing more to be said. If t here is communion with  these two things 
then all action will be from there.  
     Questioner: The trouble is that I still think there is somethin g to be discovered 
which will put everything else in its right place, in its right order.  
     Krishnamurti: Without these two things  there is no possibility of going further. 
And there may be no going  anywhere at all!  
     Questioner: Can I be in  communion with it all the ti me? I can see that when we 
are together I can be somewhat in comm union with it. But can I maintain it?  
     Krishnamurti: To desire to maintain it is the noise, and therefore the losing of 
it.   69Organisation  
 Questioner: I have belonged to many organizations, religious, business and 
political. Obviously we must have some kind of organization; withou t it life couldn't 
continue, so I've been wonderin g, after listening to you, what relationship there is 
between freedom and organization. Where does freedom begin and organization 
end? What is the relationsh ip between religious orga nizations and Moksha or 
liberation?  
     Krishnamurti: As human beings living  in a very complex society, organizations 
are needed to communicate, to travel, to  bring food, clothes and shelter, for all 
the business of living together whether in ci ties or in the coun try. Now this must 
be organized efficiently and humanely, not only for the benefit of the few but for 
everyone, without the divisions of nationality, race or clas s. This earth is ours, not 
yours or mine. To live happily, physically , there must be sane , rational, efficient 
organizations. Now there is disorder because th ere is division. Millions go hungry 
while there is vast prosperity. There are wars, conflicts and every form of 
brutality. Then there is the organization of belief - the organization of religions, 
which again breeds disunity and war. The morality which man has pursued has 
led to this disorder and chaos. This is t he actual state of the world. And when you 
ask what is the relationship between organization and free dom, are you not 
separating freedom from everyday existence? When you separate  it in this way 
as being something entirely different from  life, isn't this, in  itself, conflict and 
disorder? So really the question is: is it possible to live in fr eedom and to organize 
life from this freedom, in this freedom?  
     Questioner: Then there would be no problem. But the organization of life isn't 
made by yourself: others make it for you - the government  and others send you to 
war or determine your job. So you cannot simply orga nize for yourself out of 
freedom. The whole point of my question is that the or ganization imposed on us 
by the government, by society,  by morality, is not freedom.  And if we reject it we  70find ourselves in the midst of a revoluti on, or some sociological reformation, 
which is a way of starting the same ol d cycle all over ag ain. Inwardly and 
outwardly we are born into organization, which limits freedom.  We either submit 
or revolt. We are caught in this trap. So there se ems to be no question of 
organizing anything out of freedom.  
     Krishnamurti: We do not realize that  we have created society, this disorder, 
these walls; each one of us is responsible for it all. What we are, society is. 
Society is not different from us. If we are in conflict, avaricious, envious, fearful, 
we bring about such a society.  
     Questioner: There is a difference be tween the individual and society. I am a 
vegetarian; society sl aughters animals. I don' t want to go to war; society will force 
me to do so. Are you telling me that this war, is my doing?  
     Krishnamurti: Yes, it's your respons ibility. You have brought  it about by your 
nationality, your greed, en vy and hate. You are responsible for war as long as 
you have those things in yo ur heart, as long as you be long to any nationality, 
creed or race. It is only t hose who are free of those th ings who can say that they 
have not created this  society. There-  
     fore our responsibility is to see th at we change, and to help others to change, 
without violence and bloodshed.  
     Questioner: That means organized religion.  
     Krishnamurti: Certainly not. Or ganized religion is based on belief and 
authority.  
     Questioner: Where does this get us in our original question regarding the 
relationship between freedo m and organization? Organiza tion is always imposed 
or inherited from the environment, and freedom is always from the inside, and 
these two clash.   71     Krishnamurti: Where are you going to start? You must start from freedom. 
Where there is freedom there is love. Th is freedom and love will show you when 
to co-operate and when not to cooperate.  This is not an act of choice, because 
choice is the result of c onfusion. Love and freedom ar e intelligence. So what we 
are concerned with is not the division between organization and freedom but 
whether we can live in this world without division at all.  It is division which denies 
freedom and love, not organization. When or ganization divides, it leads to war. 
Belief in any form, ideals, however noble or effective,  breed division. Organized 
religion is the cause of division, just like nationality and power-groups. So be 
concerned with those things which divide, those things which bring about division 
between man and man, whether they be individual or  collective. The family, the 
church, and the State bring about such division. What is important is the 
movement of thought which divides. Thought itself is always divisive, so all action 
based on an idea or an ideolo gy is division. Thought cultivates prejudice, opinion, 
judgement. Man in himself, being divided, seeks freedom out of this division. Not 
being able to find it he hopes  to integrate the various divi sions, and of course this 
is not possible. You cannot integrate two prejudices . To live in this world in 
freedom means to live with love, eschewing every form of division. When there is 
freedom and love, then this in telligence will act in  co-operation, an d will also know 
when not to co-operate.   72Love And Sex  
 Questioner: I'm a married man with several children. I've lived rather a 
dissipated life in search of pleasure, but a fairly  civilized life too,  and I've made a 
success of it financially. But now I'm middle-aged and am feeling concerned, not 
only about my family but also about the way the world is  going. I'm not given to 
brutality or violent feelings, and I have always considered th at forgiveness and 
compassion are the most im portant things in life. Without these man becomes 
subhuman. So if I may I should  like to ask you what love is. Is there really such a 
thing? Compassion must be part of it, bu t I always feel that  love is something 
much vaster, and if we coul d explore it together perhaps I should then make my 
life into something worthwhile before it is too late. I have  really come to ask this 
one thing - what is love?  
     Krishnamurti: Before we begin to go into this we must be very clear that the 
word is not the thing, the description is not the described, because any amount of 
explanation, however subtle  and clever, will not open the heart to the immensity 
of love. This we must unde rstand, and not merely stick to words: words are useful 
for communication, but in talking about so mething that is really non-verbal we 
must establish a comm union between us, so that both of us feel and realize the 
same thing at the same time, with a fu llness of mind and heart. Otherwise we will 
be playing with words. How c an one approach this really  very subtle thing that 
cannot be touched by  the mind? We must go rather he sitatingly. Shall we first see 
what it is not, and then perhaps we ma y be able to see what it is? Through 
negation we may come upon the positive, but merely to  pursue the positive leads 
to assumptions and conclusions which brin g about division. You are asking what 
l o v e  i s .  W e  a r e  s a y i n g  w e  m a y  c o m e  u p o n  i t  w h e n  w e  k n o w  w h a t  i t  i s  n o t .  Anything that brings about a division, a separation, is not love, for in that there is 
conflict, strife and brutality.   73     Questioner: What do you mean by a division, a separation that brings about 
strife - what do you mean by it?  
     Krishnamurti: Thought in its very na ture is divisive. It is  thought that seeks 
pleasure and holds it. It is thou ght that cultivates desire.  
     Questioner: Will you go into desire a bit more?  
     Krishnamurti: There is the seeing of a house, the sensation that it is lovely, 
then there is the desire to ow n it and to have pleasure from it, then there is the 
effort to get it. All this constitutes the centre, and th is centre is the cause of 
division. This centre is the feeling of a "me", which is the cause of division, 
because this very feeling of "me`' is the feeling of separation . People have called 
this the ego and all kinds of  other names - the "lower self" as opposed to some 
idea of a "higher self" - but there is no need to be comp licated about i t; it is very 
simple. Where there is the centre, which is the feeling of "me", which in its 
activities isolates itself, there is division  and resistance. And a ll this is the process 
of thought. So when you ask what is love, it is not of this centre. Love is not 
pleasure and pain, nor hate nor violence in any form. Questioner: Therefore in 
this love you speak of there can be no sex because there cannot be desire?  
     Krishnamurti: Don't, please, come to any conclusion. We are investigating, 
exploring. Any conclusion or assumption pr events further enquiry.  To answer this 
question we have also to look at the energy of th ought. Thought, as we have 
said, sustains pleasure by thinking abou t something that has been pleasurable, 
cultivating the image, the picture. Thou ght engenders pleasure. Thinking about 
the sexual act becomes lust, which is entirely different from the act of sex. What 
most people are concerned with is the pa ssion of lust. Craving before and after 
sex is lust. This craving is thought. Thought is not love.  
     Questioner: Can there be sex without this desire  of thought?   74     Krishnamurti: You have to find ou t for yourself. Sex plays an extraordinarily 
important part in our lives because it  is perhaps the only deep, firsthand 
experience we have. Intellect ually and emotionally we co nform, imitate, follow, 
obey. There is pain and strife in all our relationships, exce pt in the act of sex. This 
act, being so different and beautiful, we become addicted to, so it in turn 
becomes a bondage. The bond age is the demand for it s continuation - again the 
action of the centre which is divisive. On e is so hedged about - intellectually, in 
the family, in the community, through social morality, th rough religious sanctions - 
so hedged about that there is only this one relationship left in which there is 
freedom and intensity. Ther efore we give tremendous importance to it. But if 
there were freedom all around  then this would not be such a craving and such a 
problem. We make it a problem because we  can't get enough of it, or because we 
feel guilty at having got it, or because in getting it we break the rules which 
society has laid down. It is the old societ y which calls the new society permissive 
because for the new society se x is a part of life. In freeing the mind from the 
bondage of imitation, authority, conformity and religi ous prescriptions, sex has its 
own place, but it won't be all-consuming.  From this one can see that freedom is 
essential for love - not the freedom of re volt, not the freedom of doing what one 
likes nor of indulging openly or secretly  one's cravings, but rather the freedom 
which comes in the understan ding of this whole stru cture and nature of the 
centre. Then freedom is love.  
     Questioner: So freedom is not licence?  
     Krishnamurti: No. Licence is bonda ge. Love is not hate, nor jealousy, nor 
ambition, nor the competitive spirit with its fear of fa ilure. It is not the love of god 
nor the love of man - which again is a divi sion. Love is not of the one or of the 
many. When there is love it is persona l and impersonal, with and without an 
object. It is like the perfume of  a flower; one or many can smell it: what matters is 
the perfume, not to whom it belongs.   75     Questioner: Where does forgiveness come in all this?  
     Krishnamurti: When there is love there can be no forgiveness. Forgiveness 
comes only after you have accumulated ra ncour; forgiveness is resentment. 
Where there is no wound there is no need fo r healing. It is ina ttention that breeds 
resentment and hate, and you become aware of them and then forgive. 
Forgiveness encourages division. When yo u are conscious that you are forgiving, 
then you are sinning. When you are conscious that you are tolerant, then you are 
intolerant. When you are con scious that you are silent, then there is no silence. 
When you deliberately set about to love, then you are violen t. As long as there is 
an observer who says, "I am" or "I am not", love cannot be.  
     Questioner: What place has fear in love?  
     Krishnamurti: How can you ask su ch a question? Where one is, the other is 
not. When there is love yo u can do what you will.   76Perception  
 Questioner: You use different word s for perception. You sometimes say 
"perception", but also "observe", "see",  "understand", "be aw are of". I suppose 
you use all these words to mean the same thing: to see clearly, completely, 
wholly. Can one see anything totally? We're not talking of  physical or technical 
things, but psychologically can you perceive or unde rstand anything totally? Isn't 
there always something concealed so that  you only see part ially? I'd be most 
obliged if you could go into this matter rather extensively. I feel this is an 
important question because it  may perhaps be a clue to  a great many things in 
life. If I could understand myself totally  then perhaps I would have all my 
problems solved and be a happy superhum an being. When I talk about it I feel 
rather excited at the possibility of going beyond my little world with its problems 
and agonies. So what do you mean by perceiving, seeing? Can one see oneself 
completely?  
     Krishnamurti: We always look at things partially. Firs tly because we are 
inattentive and secondly because  we look at things from  prejudices, from verbal 
and psychological images about what we see. So we ne ver see anything 
completely. Even to lo ok objectively at nature is quit e arduous. To look at a flower 
without any image, without any botanical kn owledge - just to ob serve it - becomes 
quite difficult because our mind is wan dering, uninterested. And even if it is 
interested it looks at the fl ower with certain appreciations and verbal descriptions 
which seem to give the observer a fee ling that he has rea lly looked at it. 
Deliberate looking is not looking. So we rea lly never look at the flower. We look at 
it through the image. Perhaps it is fairly  easy to look at something that doesn't 
deeply touch us, as when we  go to the cinema and see something which stirs us 
for the moment but which we  soon forget. But to obse rve ourselves without the 
image - which is the past, our accumula ted experience and knowledge - happens 
very rarely. We have an image about oursel ves. We think we ought to be this and  77not that. We have built a pr evious idea about ourselves an d through it we look at 
ourselves. We think we are noble or igno ble and seeing what we actually are 
either depresses us or fri ghtens us. So we cannot lo ok at ourselves; and when 
we do, it is partial~ observation, and anything that is partial or incomplete doesn't 
bring understanding. It is only  when we can look at ours elves totally that there is 
a possibility of being free from what we observe. Our perception is not only with 
the eyes, with the senses, but also with the mind, and obviously the mind is 
heavily conditioned. So intellectual per ception is only part ial perception, yet 
perceiving with the intellect seems to satisfy most of us, and we think we 
understand. A fragme ntary understanding is the mo st dangerous and destructive 
thing. And that is exactly what is happeni ng all over the world. The politician, the 
priest, the businessman, the technician; ev en the artist - all of them see only 
partially. And therefore they are really very destructiv e people. As they play a 
great part in the world their partial pe rception becomes the accepted norm, and 
man is caught in this. Each of us is at the same time the priest, the politician, the 
businessman, the artist, and many other fragmentary enti ties. And each of us is 
Questioner: I see this clearly. I'm using the word see intellect ually, of course.  
     Krishnamurti: If you see this totally, not in tellectually or verba lly or emotionally, 
then you will act and live quite a different kind of life. When you see a dangerous 
precipice or are faced by a dangerous anima l there is no partial understanding or 
partial action; there is complete action.  
     Questioner: But we are not faced with such danger ous crises every moment of 
our lives.  
     Krishnamurti: We are faced with su ch dangerous crises all the time. You have 
become accustomed to them, or are indiffe rent to them, or you leave it to others 
to solve the problems; and these other s are equally blind and lopsided.  
     Questioner: But how am I to be awar e of these crises all the time, and why do 
you say there is a cr isis all the time?   78     Krishnamurti: The whole of life is in each moment. Each moment is a 
challenge. To meet this challenge inadequately is  a crisis in livi ng. We don't want 
to see that these are crises , and we shut our eyes to escape from them. So we 
become blinder, and t he crises augment.  
     Questioner: But how am  I to perceive totally? I'm be ginning to understand that 
I see only partially, and also to understand  the importance of looking at myself 
and the world with complete perception, but there is so much going on in me that 
it is difficult to decide what  to look at. My mind  is like a great ca ge full of restless 
monkeys.  
     Krishnamurti: If you see one movement totally, in that totality every other 
movement is included. If you understand one problem  completely, then you 
understand all human problems,  for they are all interrela ted. So the question is: 
can one understand, or perceiv e, or see, one problem so completely that in the 
very understanding of it on e has understood the rest? This proble m must be seen 
while it is happening, not after or befo re, as memory or as  an example. For 
instance, it is no good now for us to go into anger or fear; the thing to do is to 
observe them as they aris e. Perception is instan taneous: you understand 
something instantly or not at all: seeing, hearing, understanding are 
instantaneous. Listening an d looking have duration.  
     Questioner: My problem goes on. It exists in a span of time. You are saying 
that seeing is instantaneou s and therefore out of time. What gives jeal ousy or any 
other habit, or any other problem, duration?  
     Krishnamurti: Don't they go on be cause you have not lo oked at them with 
sensitivity, choiceless awareness, inte lligence? You have looked partially and 
therefore allowed them to c ontinue. And in addition, want ing to get rid of them is 
another problem with duration. The incapaci ty to deal with so mething makes of it 
a problem with duration, and gives it life.   79     Questioner: But how am I to see that whole thing instantly? How am I to 
understand so that it never comes back?  
     Krishnamurti: Are you laying emphas is on never or on understanding? If you 
lay emphasis on never it means  you want to escape from it permanently, and this 
means the creation of a second  problem. So we have only one question, which is 
how to see the problem so completely that one is free of it. Perception can only 
be out of silence, not out of  a chattering mind. The chat tering may be the wanting 
to get rid of it, reduce it, esc ape from it, suppress it or fi nd a substitute for it, but it 
is only a quiet mind that sees.  
     Questioner: How am I to have a quiet mind?  
     Krishnamurti: You don't see the trut h that only a quiet mind sees. How to get a 
quiet mind doesn't arise. It is the truth t hat the mind must be quiet, and seeing the 
truth of this frees the mind from chattering. Perception, which is intelligence, is 
then operating, not the assu mption that you must be silent in order to see. 
Assumption can also operate but that is a partial, frag mentary operation. There is 
no relationship between the partial and the total; the partial cannot grow into the 
total. Therefore seeing is of  the greatest importance. Seei ng is attention, and it is 
only inattention that gives rise to a problem.  
     Questioner: How can I be atte ntive all the time? It's impossible!  
     Krishnamurti: That's quite right, it  is impossible. But to be aware of your 
inattention is of the greatest importance, not how to be attentiv e all the time. It is 
greed that asks the question , "How can I be attentive all the time?" One gets lost 
in the practice of being attentive. The practice of being  attentive is inattention. 
You cannot practice to be beautiful, or to love. When hate ceases the other is. Hate can cease only when yo u give your whole attention to it, when you learn and 
do not accumulate knowledge ab out it. Begin very simply.   80     Questioner: What is the point of your talking if there is no thing we can practise 
after having heard you?  
     Krishnamurti: The hear ing is of the greatest import ance, not what you practise 
afterwards. The hearing is the instantane ous action. The practice gives duration 
to problems. Practice is to tal inattention. Never prac tise: you can only practise 
mistakes. Learning is always new.   81Suffering  
 Questioner: I seem to have suffered a great deal all my life, not physically, but 
through death and loneliness and the utter futility of my  existence. I had a son 
whom I greatly loved. He died in an acci dent. My wife left me , and that caused a 
great deal of pain. I suppose I am like thousands of other middle-class people 
with sufficient money and a steady job. I'm not compla ining of my circumstances 
but I want to understand what sorrow mean s, why it comes at all. One has been 
told that wisdom comes th rough sorrow, but I have found quite the contrary.  
     Krishnamurti: I wonder  what you have learnt from  suffering? Have you learnt 
anything at all? What has sorrow taught you?  
     Questioner: It has certainly taught me never to be attach ed to people, and a 
certain bitterness, a certain aloofness and not to allow my feelings to run away 
with me. It has taught me  to be very careful not to get hurt again.  
     Krishnamurti: So, as you say, it hasn't taught you wisdom; on the contrary it 
has made you more cunning,  more insensitive. Does sorrow teach one anything 
at all except the obvious self-protective reactions?  
     Questioner: I have always accepted su ffering as part of my life, but I feel now, 
somehow, that I'd like to be free of it, free of all the tawdry bitterness and 
indifference without again going through a ll the pain of attachment. My life is so 
pointless and empty, utterly self-enclo sed and insignificant. It's a life of 
mediocrity, and perhaps that mediocrity  is the greatest sorrow of all.  
     Krishnamurti: There is the personal sorrow and the sorrow of the world. There 
is the sorrow of ignorance and the sorrow of time. This ignorance is the lack of 
knowing oneself, and the sorrow of time is the deception that time can cure, heal 
and change. Most people are caught in that deception and either worship sorrow  82or explain it away. But in ei ther case it continues, and one never asks oneself if it 
can come to an end.  
     Questioner: But I am asking now if it can come to an en d, and how? How am I 
to end it? I understand that it 's no good running away from  it, or resisting it with 
bitterness and cynicism. What am I to do to end the grief which I have carried for 
so long?  
     Krishnamurti: Self-pity is one of the elements of sorrow . Another element is 
being attached to someone and encouraging or fostering his attachment to you. 
Sorrow is not only there when  attachment fails you but its seed is in the very 
beginning of that attachment. In all this the trouble is the utter lack of knowing 
oneself. Knowing oneself is  the ending of sorrow. We are afraid to know 
ourselves because we have di vided ourselves into the go od and the bad, the evil 
and the noble, the pur e and the impure. The good is always judging the bad, and 
these fragments are at war with each other. This war is  sorrow. To end sorrow is 
to see the fact and not inve nt its opposite, for the opposites contain each other. 
Walking in this corridor of opposites is sorrow. This fr agmentation of life into the 
high and the low, the noble and the ignoble,  God and the Devil, breeds conflict 
and pain. When there is sorrow, there is  no love. Love and sorrow cannot live 
together.  
     Questioner: Ah! But love can inflic t sorrow on another. I may love another and 
yet bring him sorrow.  
     Krishnamurti: Do you bring it, if yo u love, or does he? If an other is attached to 
you, with or without enco uragement, and you turn away  from him and he suffers, 
is it you or he who has br ought about his suffering?  
     Questioner: You mean I am not responsible for som eone else's sorrow, even if 
it is on my account? How d oes sorrow ever end then?   83     Krishnamurti: As we have said, it is only in knowing o neself completely that 
sorrow ends. Do you kn ow yourself at a glance, or hope to after a long analysis? 
Through analysis you cannot know yourself. You can only know yourself without 
accumulation, in relationship, from moment  to moment. This me ans that one must 
be aware, without any choice, of what is actually taking place. It means to see 
oneself as one is, without th e opposite, the ideal, with out the knowledge of what 
one has been. If you look at yourself with the eyes of resentme nt or rancour then 
what you see is coloured by  the past. The shedding of th e past all the time when 
you see yourself is the fr eedom from the past. Sorrow ends only when there is 
the light of understanding, and this light is not lit by one ex perience or by one 
flash of understanding; this understanding is lighting itself a ll the time. Nobody 
can give it to you - no book, trick, t eacher or saviour. Th e understanding of 
yourself is the ending of sorrow.   84The Heart And The Mind  
 Questioner: Why is it that man has  divided his being into different 
compartments - the intellect and th e emotions? Each seems to exist 
independently of the othe r. These two driving forces in life are often so 
contradictory that they  seem to tear apart the very fabric of our being. To bring 
them together so that man can act as a total entity has always been one of the 
principle aims of life. And added to these two things within man there is a third 
which is his changing environment. So th ese two contradictory things within him 
are further in opposition to the third which appears to be outside himself. Here is 
a problem so confusing, so contradictory, so vast that the intellect invents an 
outside agency called God to bring them together, and this further complicates 
the whole business. There is only  this one problem in life.  
     Krishnamurti: You seem to be carried away by your own words. Is this really a 
problem to you or are you inventing it in order to have a good discussion? If it is 
for a discussion then it has no real content. But if it is a real problem then we can 
go into it deeply. Here we have a very comp lex situation, the inner dividing itself 
into compartments and furt her separating itself from  its environment. And still 
further, it separates the environment, which it calls society, into classes, races 
and economic, national and geographic groups . This seems to be what is actually 
going on in the world and we call it living.  Being unable to solve this problem we 
invent a super-entity, an agency that we ho pe will bring about  a harmony and a 
binding quality in ourselves and between us. This binding  quality which we call 
religion brings about another factor of division in its turn . So the question 
becomes: what will bring about a complete harmony of living in which there are 
no divisions but a state in which the intellect and the heart are both the 
expression of a total entity? Th at entity is not a fragment.   85     Questioner: I agree with  you, but how is this to be brought about? This is what 
man has always longed for and has sought through all religions and all political 
and social utopias.  
     Krishnamurti: You ask how. The "how" is the great mi stake. It is the separating 
factor. There is your "how" and my "how" and somebody else's "how". So if we 
never used that word we would be really  enquiring and not seeking a method to 
achieve a determined result. So  can you put away altogether this idea of a recipe, 
a result? If you can define a result you already know it and therefore it is 
conditioned and not free. If we  put away the recipe then  we are both capable of 
enquiring if it is at a ll possible to brin g about a harmonio us whole without 
inventing an outside agency, for all outside agencies, whether they are 
environmental or supere nvironmental, only incr ease the problem.  
     First of all, it is the mind that divi des itself as feeling, intellect and environment; 
it is the mind that invents the outside agency; it is the mind that creates the 
problem.  
     Questioner: This division is not on ly in the mind. It is even stronger in the 
feelings. The Muslims and Hindus do not think themselv es separate, they feel 
themselves separate, and it is this feeling that actually ma kes them separate and 
makes them destroy each other.  
     Krishnamurti: Exactly:  the thinking and the feeli ng are one; they have been 
one from the beginning and th at is exactly what we are saying. So our problem is 
not the integration of the different fragm ents but the understanding of this mind 
and heart which are one. Our problem is no t how to get rid of classes or how to 
build better utopias or breed better political leaders or new religious teachers. Our 
problem is the mind. To come to this point not th eoretically but to see it actually is 
the highest form of intelligence. For then  you do not belong to any class or 
religious group; then you are not a Muslim, a Hindu, a jew or a Christian. So we 
now have only one issue: wh y does the mind of man di vide? It not only divides its  86own functions into feelings and thoughts but separates it self as the "I" from the 
"you", and the "we" from the "they". The mind and the heart ar e one. Don't let us 
forget it. Remember it when we use the word "mind". So our problem is, why does 
the mind divide?  
     Questioner: Yes.  
     Krishnamurti: The mind is thought. All the activity of th ought is separation, 
fragmentation. Thought is the response of  memory which is the brain. The brain 
must respond when it sees a danger. This is intelligence , but this same brain has 
somehow been conditioned not to  see the danger of divisi on. Its actions are valid 
and necessary when they  deal with facts. Eq ually, it will act when  it sees the fact 
that division and fragmentation are dangero us to it. This is  not an idea or an 
ideology or a principle or a concept - all of  which are idiotic and separative: it is a 
fact. To see danger the brain has to be very  alert and awake, all of it, not just a 
segment of it.  
     Questioner: How is it possi ble to keep the whole brain awake?  
     Krishnamurti: As we said, there is no "how" but only seeing  the danger, that is 
the whole point. The seeing is not the resu lt of propaganda or conditioning; the 
seeing is with the whole brain. When th e brain is completely awake then the mind 
becomes quiet. When the brain is completely awake there is no fragmentation, no 
separation, no duality. The qu ality of this quietness is of the highest importance. 
You can make the mind quiet by drugs and all kinds of tr icks but such deceptions 
breed various other forms of illusion and contradiction. Th is quietness is the 
highest form of intelligence which is never personal or impers onal, never yours or 
mine. Being anonymous, it is whole and im maculate. It defies description for it 
has no quality. This is awareness, this is a ttention, this is love, this is the highest. 
The brain must be completely  awake, that's all. As th e man in the jungle must 
keep terribly awake to survive, so the man in the jungle of the world must keep 
terribly awake to live completely.   87 88Beauty And The Artist  
 Questioner: I wonder what an artist is ? There on the banks of the Ganges, in a 
dark little room, a man sits we aving a most beautiful sari in silk and gold, and in 
Paris in his atelier another man is painti ng a picture which he  hopes will bring him 
fame. Somewhere there is a wr iter cunningly spinning ou t stories stating the old, 
old problem of man and woman;  then there is the scienti st in his laboratory and 
the technician putting toge ther a million parts so that  a rocket may go to the 
moon. And in India a musician is living a lif e of great austerity in  order to transmit 
faithfully the distilled beaut y of his music. There is  the housewife preparing a 
meal, and the poet walk ing alone in the woods. Aren't these all artists in their own 
way? I feel that beauty is in the hands of everybody, but they don't know it. The 
man who makes beautif ul clothes or excellent sh oes, the woman who arranged 
those flowers on your table, all of them seem to work with beauty. I often wonder 
why it is that the painter, the sculptor , the composer, the wr iter - the so-called 
creative artists - have such extraordinar y importance in this world and not the 
shoemaker or the cook. Ar en't they creative too? Wh en you consider all the 
varieties of expression whic h people consider beautiful , then what place has a 
true artist in life, and who is the true artist? It is said that beauty is the very 
essence of all life. Is that  building over there, which is considered to be so 
beautiful, the expression of that essence? I should grea tly appreciate it if you 
would go into this whole question of beauty and the artist.  
     Krishnamurti: Surely th e artist is one who is skilled in action? This action is in 
life and not outside of life. Therefore if it is  living skilfully that truly makes an artist. 
This skill can operate for a few hours in t he day when he is pl aying an instrument, 
writing poems or painting pict ures, or it can operate a bi t more if he is skilled in 
many such fragments - like those great men of the Renaissance who worked in 
several different media. But the few hours of music or writing may contradict the 
rest of his living which is in disorder and confusion. So is such a man an artist at  89all? The man who plays the violin with artistry and ke eps his eye on his fame isn't 
interested in the violin, he is  only exploiting it to be famous, the "me"  is far more 
important than the music, and so  it is with the writer or the painter with an eye on 
fame. The musician identifies his "me" with  what he considers to be beautiful 
music, and the religious man identifies his "me" with what he considers to be the 
sublime. All these are skilled in their particul ar little fields but the rest of the vast 
field of life is disregarded. So  we have to find out what is skill in acti on, in living, 
not only in painting or in writing or in  technology, but how one can live the whole 
of life with skill and beauty.  Are skill and beauty the same? Can a human being - 
whether he be an artist or not - live t he whole of his life with skill and beauty? 
Living is action and when that  action breeds sorrow it ceas es to be skilful. So can 
a man live without sorrow, without friction, without jealousy and greed, without 
conflict of any kind? The issu e is not who is an artist and who is not an artist but 
whether a human being,  you or another, ca n live without torture and distortion. Of 
course it is profane to belittle great music, great sculpture, great poetry or 
dancing, or to sneer at it; that is to be unskilled in one's own life. But the artistry 
and beauty which is skill in action should operate thro ughout the day, not just 
during a few hours of the day. This is the real challenge,  not just playing the piano 
beautifully. You must play it be autifully if you touch it at all, but that is not enough. 
It is like cultivating a small corner of a huge field. We are concerned with the 
whole field and that field is life. What we  always do is to neglect the whole field 
and concentrate on fragment s, our own or other people' s. Artistry is to be 
completely awake and therefore to be skilful in action in the whole of life, and this 
is beauty.  
     Questioner: What about the factory worker or the office employee? Is he an 
artist? Doesn't his work prec lude skill in action  and so deaden hi m that he has no 
skill in anything else either? Is he not conditioned by his work?  
     Krishnamurti: Of course he is. But if he wakes up he will either leave his work 
or so transform it that it becomes artist ry. What is important is not the work but  90the waking up to the work. What is import ant is not the conditioning of the work 
but to wake up.  
     Questioner: What do you mean, wake up?  
     Krishnamurti: Are you awakened only  by circumstances, by challenges, by 
some disaster or joy? Or is there a state of being aw ake without any cause? If 
you are awakened by an event, a cause,  then you depend on it, and when you 
any dependence is the end of skill, the end of artistry.  
     Questioner: What is this other awakened state that has no cause? You are 
talking about a state in which there is ne ither a cause nor an effect. Can there be 
a state of mind that is not the result of some cause? I do n't understand that 
because surely everything we think and everything we  are is the result of a 
cause? There is the endless chain of ca use and effect.  
     Krishnamurti: This chain of cause and effect is endle ss because the effect 
becomes the cause and t he cause begets further effects, and so on.  
     Questioner: Then what acti on is there outside this chain?  
     Krishnamurti: All we know is action with a cause, a motive, action which is a 
result. All action is in relationship. If relationship is based on cause it is cunning 
adaptation, and therefore inevitably leads to another form of du llness. Love is the 
only thing that is causeless, th at is free; it is beauty, it is  skill, it is art. Without love 
there is no art. When the artist is playing beautifully there is no "me; there is love 
and beauty, and this is art. This is skill in action. Skill in action  is the absence of 
the "me". Art is the absence of the "me". But when you neglect the whole field of 
life and concentrate only on a little part  - however much the "me" may then be 
absent, you are still living unsk ilfully and therefore you are not an artist of life. The 
absence of "me" in living is love and beauty, which brings its ow n skill. This is the 
greatest art: living skilfully in the whole field of Life.   91     Questioner: Oh Lord! Ho w am I to do that? I see it and feel it in my heart but 
how can I maintain it?  
     Krishnamurti: Th ere is no way to maintain it, ther e is no way to nourish it, there 
is no practising of it; there is only the seeing of it. Se eing is the greatest of all 
skills.   92Dependence  
 Questioner: I should like to understand the nature  of dependence. I have 
found myself depending on so many things  - on women, on different kinds of 
amusement, on good wine, on my wife an d children, on my friends, on what 
people say. Fortunately I no longer de pend on religious en tertainment, but I 
depend on the books I read to  stimulate me and on good conversation. I see that 
the young are also dependen t, perhaps not so much as I am, but they have their 
own particular forms of dependence. I ha ve been to the East and have seen how 
there they depend on the guru and the family. Tradition there has greater 
importance and is more deeply rooted than it is here in Europe, and, of course, 
very much more so than in America. Bu t we all seem to depend on something to 
sustain us, not only physically but, much  more, inwardly. So I am wondering 
whether it is at all possible to be rea lly free of dependence , and should one be 
free of it?  
     Krishnamurti: I take it you are concerned with the psychological inward 
attachments. The more on e is attached the great er the dependence. The 
attachment is not only to pe rsons but to ideas and to things. One is attached to a 
particular environment, to a particular co untry and so on. And from this springs 
dependence and ther efore resistance.  
     Questioner: Why resistance? Krishnam urti: The object of my  attachment is my 
territorial or my sexual do main. This I protect, resistin g any form of encroachment 
on it from others. I also limit the freedom of the person to whom I am attached 
and limit my own freedom. So attachment is resist ance. I am attached to 
something or somebody. That attachment is possessiveness; possessiveness is 
resistance, so attachment is resistance.  
     Questioner: Yes, I see that.   93     Krishnamurti: Any form of encroach ment on my possessions leads to violence, 
legally or psychologically. So attachment is violence, resistance, imprisonment - 
the imprisonment of onesel f and of the object of a ttachment. Attachment means 
this is mine and not yours; keep off! So this relationsh ip is resistance against 
others. The whole world is  divided into mine and yours: my opinion, my 
judgement, my advice, my God,  my country - an infinity  of such nonsense. Seeing 
all this taking place, not in abstraction but  actually in our da ily life, we can ask 
why there is this attachment to people, things and ideas. Why does one depend? 
All being is relationship and all relationship  is in this dependence with its violence, 
resistance and domination. We have made  the whole world in to this. Where one 
possesses one must domi nate. We meet beauty, love springs up, and 
immediately it turns to attachment and all this misery begins and the love has 
gone out of the window. Then we ask, "What has happened to our great love?" 
This is actually what is ha ppening in our daily life. An d, seeing all this, we can 
now ask: why is man invariably attached, not only to that  which is lovely, but also 
to every form of illusion and to  so many idiotic fancies?  
     Freedom is not a state of non-depend ence; it is a positive  state in which there 
isn't any dependence. But it  is not a result, it has no cause. This must be 
understood very clearly before we can go into the question of why man depends 
or falls into the trap of attachment with  all its miseries. Bein g attached we try to 
cultivate a state of indepe ndence - which is anothe r form of resistance.  
     Questioner: So what is freedom? Yo u say it is not the negation of dependence 
or the ending of dependence; you say it is  not freedom from something, but just 
freedom. So what is it? Is it an  abstraction or an actuality?  
     Krishnamurti: It is not an abstraction. It is the state of mind in which there is no 
form of resistance whatsoever. It is not  like a river accomm odating itself to 
boulders here and there, goin g round or over them. In this freedom there are no 
boulders at all, only the mo vement of the water.   94     Questioner: But the boulder of attach ment is there, in th is river of life. You 
can't just speak about another rive r in which there are no boulders.  
     Krishnamurti: We are not avoiding the boulder or saying it doesn't exist. We 
must first understand freedom. It is not th e same river as the one in which there 
are the boulders.  
     Questioner: I have still got my river with its boulders,  and that's what I came to 
ask about, not about some ot her unknown river without b oulders. That's no good 
to me.  
     Krishnamurti: Quite right. But you must understand what free dom is in order to 
understand your bo ulders. But don't let us flog th is simile to de ath. We must 
consider both freedom and attachment.  
     Questioner: What has my attachment  to do with freedom or freedom with my 
attachment?  
     Krishnamurti: In your attachment ther e is pain. You want to be rid of this pain, 
so you cultivate detachment wh ich is another form of re sistance. In the opposite 
there is no freedom. Thes e two opposites are identica l and mutually strengthen 
each other. What you are concerned with  is how to have the pleasures of 
attachment without its mise ries. You cannot. That is why it is important to 
understand that freedom does not lie in detachment. In the process of 
understanding attachment there is freedom,  not in running away  from attachment. 
So our question now is, why are hu man beings attach ed, dependent?  
     Being nothing, being a desert in oneself, one hopes through another to find 
water. Being empty, poor, wr etched, insufficient, devoid of interest or importance, 
one hopes through another to be enrich ed. Through the love  of another one 
hopes to forget oneself. Th rough the beauty of another one hopes to acquire 
beauty. Through the family, through the na tion, through the lo ver, through some 
fantastic belief, one hopes to  cover this desert with flowers. And God is the  95ultimate lover. So one puts hooks into all thes e things. In this there is pain and 
uncertainty, and the desert seems more arid than ever before. Of course it is 
neither more nor less arid; it is what it was, only one has av oided looking at it 
while escaping through some form of atta chment with its pain , and then escaping 
from that pain into detachment. But one remains arid and em pty as before. So 
instead of trying to escape, either through  attachment or thro ugh detachment, can 
we not become aware of this fact, of this deep inward pove rty and inadequacy, 
this dull, hollow isolation? That is the on ly thing that matters , not attachment or 
detachment. Can you look at it without an y sense of condemnat ion or evaluation? 
When you do,are you looking at  it as an observer who looks at the observed, or 
without the observer?  
     Questioner: What do you mean, the observer?  
     Krishnamurti: Are you looking at it fr om a centre with all its conclusions of like 
and dislike, opinion, judgement, the desire to be free of this emptiness and so on 
- are you looking at this aridness with the eyes of conclusion - or are you looking 
with eyes that are completely  free? When you look at it with completely free eyes 
there is no observer. If there is no obs erver, is there the thing observed as 
loneliness, emptiness, wretchedness?  
     Questioner: Do you me an to say that that tree do esn't exist if I look at it 
without conclusions, without a ce ntre which is the observer?  
     Krishnamurti: Of course the tree exists.  
     Questioner: Why does loneliness disappear but not the tree when I look 
without the observer?  
     Krishnamurti: Because the tree is not created by th e centre, by the mind of the 
"me". But the mind of the "me', in all its self-centred activity has created this 
emptiness, this isolation. And when that mind, without the centre, looks, the self-
centred activity ends. So the loneliness is not. Then the mind functions in  96freedom. Looking at the whol e structure of attachment  and detachment, and the 
movement of pain and pleasur e, we see how the mind of  the "me" builds its own 
desert and its own es capes. When the mind of the "m e" is still, then there is no 
desert and there is no escape.   97Belief  
 Questioner: I am one of those people wh o really believe in God. In India I 
followed one of the great modern saints who, becau se he believed in God, 
brought about great political changes there.  In India the whole country throbs to 
the beat of God. I have heard you talk ag ainst belief so probably you don't believe 
in God. But you are a religious person and therefore there mu st be in you some 
kind of feeling of the Supr eme. I have been all over India and through many parts 
of Europe, visiting monasteries, church es and mosques, and everywhere I have 
found this very strong, compelling belie f in God whom one hopes shapes one's 
life. Now since you don't believe in God,  although you are a religious person, 
what exactly is your positi on with regard to this question? Why don't you believe? 
Are you an atheist? As you know, in Hind uism you can be an atheist or a theist 
and yet be equally well a Hindu. Of course it's different with the Christians. If you 
don't believe in God you c an't be a Christian. But t hat's beside the point. The 
point is that I have come to ask you to expl ain your position and demonstrate to 
me its validity. People follow you and therefore you have a responsibility, and 
therefore I am challenging you in this way.  
     Krishnamurti: Let us first of all cl ear up this last poin t. There are no followers, 
and I have no responsibility to you or to th e people who listen to  my talks. Also I 
am not a Hindu or anything else, for I do n't belong to any group, religious or 
otherwise. Each one must be a light to hi mself. Therefore there is no teacher, no 
disciple. This must be clearly understood  from the very beginning otherwise one 
is influenced, one becomes a slave to  propaganda and persu asions. Therefore 
anything that is being said now is not dogma or creed or pe rsuasion: we either 
meet together in understandi ng or we don't. Now, you sa id most emphatically that 
you believe in God and you probably want through that belief to experience what 
one might call the godhead. Belief involves many things. There is belief in facts that you may not have seen but can verify, like the exis tence of New York or the  98Eiffel Tower. Then you may believe that yo ur wife is faithful  though you don't 
actually know it. She might be unfaithful in thought yet you belie ve she is faithful 
because you don't actually see her going off with some one else; she may deceive 
you in daily thought, and you most certai nly have done the same too. You believe 
in reincarnation, don't you, though there is no certainty that there is any such 
thing? However, that belief has no validity in your lif e, has it? All Christians 
believe that they must love but they do no t love - like everyone else they go about 
killing, physically or  psychologically. There are th ose who do not believe in God 
and yet do good. Ther e are those who believe in God and kill for that belief; those 
who prepare for war because they claim they want peac e, and so on. So one has 
to ask oneself what need there is to believ e at all in anything, though this doesn't 
deny the extraordinary myst ery of life. But belief is one thing and "what is" is 
another. Belief is a word, a th ought, and this is not the th ing, any more than your 
name is actually you.  
     Through experience y ou hope to touch the truth of your belief, to prove it to 
yourself, but this belief conditions your  experience. It isn't that the experience 
comes to prove the belief, but rather that the belief begets th e experience. Your 
belief in God will give you the experience of what you call God. You will always 
experience what you believe and nothin g else. And this invalidates your 
experience. The Christian w ill see virgins, angels and Christ, and the Hindu will 
see similar deities in extravagant pluralit y. The Muslim, the Bu ddhist, the Jew and 
the Communist are the same. Belief condit ions its own supposed proof. What is 
important is not what you believe but only why you be lieve at all. Why do you 
believe? And what difference do es it make to what actua lly is whether you believe 
one thing or another? Facts are not influenc ed by belief or disbelief. So one has 
to ask why one believes at all in anything; what is the basis of belief? Is it fear, is 
it the uncertainty of life - the fear of the unknown the lack of  security in this 
everchanging world? Is it the in security of relationship, or is it that faced with the  99immensity of life, and not understanding i t, one encloses oneself in the refuge of 
belief? So, if I may ask you, if you had no fear at all, would you have any belief?  
     Questioner: I am not at all sure that I am afraid, but I love God, and it is this 
love that makes me believe in Him.  
     Krishnamurti: Do you mean to say you are devoid of fear? And therefore know 
what love is?  
     Questioner: I have replaced fear with  love and so to me fear is non-existent, 
and therefore my belief is not based on fear.  
     Krishnamurti: Can you substitute lo ve for fear? Is that not an act of thought 
which is afraid and therefore covers up the fear with the word called love, again a 
belief? You have covered up  that fear with a word and you cling to the word, 
hoping to dissipate fear.  
     Questioner: What you are saying di sturbs me greatly. I am not at all sure I 
want to go on with this, because my belief and my lo ve have sust ained me and 
helped me to lead a decent life. This questioning of my belief brings about a 
sense of disorder of which, quite frankly, I am afraid.  
     Krishnamurti: So there is fear, which you are beginnin g to discover for 
yourself. This disturbs you. Belief comes from fear and is th e most destructive 
thing. One must be free of fear and of  belief. Belief divides people, makes them 
hard, makes them hate each  other and cultivate war. In a roundabout way, 
unwillingly, you are admitti ng that fear begets belie f. Freedom from belief is 
necessary to face the fact of fear. Belief like any other ideal is an escape from "what is". When there is no fear then the mind is in quite a different dimension. 
Only then can you ask the question wh ether there is a God or not. A mind 
clouded by fear or belief is incapable of any kind of understan ding, any realization 
of what truth is. Such a mi nd lives in illusion and ca n obviously not come upon  100that which is Supreme. Th e Supreme has nothing to do with your or anybody 
else's belief, opinion or conclusion.  
     Not knowing, you believe, but to kn ow is not to know. To  know is within the 
tiny field of time and the mind that says, "I know" is bound by time and so cannot 
possibly understand that whic h is. After all, when you say, "I know my wife and 
my friend", you know only the image or the memory, and this is the past. 
Therefore you can never actually know anybody or anything . You cannot know a 
living thing, only a dead thin g. When you see this you will no longer think of 
relationship in terms of know ing. So one can never say, "There is no God", or "I 
know God". Both these are a blasphemy. To understand that which is there must 
be freedom, not only from the known but also  from the fear of the known and from 
the fear of the unknown.  
     Questioner: You speak of understand ing that which "is" and yet you deny the 
validity of knowing. What is this un derstanding if it is not knowing?  
     Krishnamurti: The two are quite di fferent. Knowing is always related to the 
past and therefore it binds you to the past. Unlike know ing understanding is not a 
conclusion, not accumulati on. If you have listened  you have understood. 
Understanding is attention. When you a ttend completely you understand. So the 
understanding of fear is the ending of fear. Your belief can therefore no longer be 
the predominant factor; the understanding of fear is predomin ant. When there is 
no fear there is freedom. It is only then t hat one can find what is true. When that 
which "is" is not distorted by fear then that which "is" is true. It is not the word. 
You cannot measure truth with words. Love is not a word  nor a belief nor 
something that you can capt ure and say, "It is mine". Without love and beauty, 
that which you call God is nothing at all.   101Dreams  
 Questioner: I have been told by profe ssionals that dreaming is as vital as 
daytime thinking and activity, and that I would find my daily living under great 
stress and strain if I did not dream. They insist, and here I'm us ing not their jargon 
but my own words, that during certain periods of sleep t he movement of the 
eyelids indicates refreshing  dreams and that these brin g a certain clarity to the 
brain. I am wondering whet her the stillness of the mi nd which you have often 
spoken about might not bring greater ha rmony to living than the equilibrium 
brought about by patterns of dreams. I sh ould also like to ask why the language 
of dreams is on e of symbols.  
     Krishnamurti: Language itself is a symbol, and we are us ed to symbols: we 
see the tree through the image which is  the symbol of the tree, we see our 
neighbour through the image we  have about him. Apparently  it is one of the most 
difficult things for a human being to look at anything directly, not through images, 
opinions, conclusions, whic h are all symbols. And so in dreams symbols play a 
large part and in this there is great de ception and danger. The meaning of a 
dream is not always clear to us, although we realize it is in  symbols and try to 
decipher them. When we see something, we speak of it so spontaneously that we 
do not recognise that words are also symbol s. All this indicates, doesn't it, that 
there is direct communic ation in technical matters  but seldom in human 
relationships and understanding? You don't need symbols wh en somebody hits 
you. That is a direct communication. This is a very interesting point: the mind 
refuses to see things directly, to be aw are of itself withou t the word and the 
symbol. You say the sky is bl ue. The listener then deciph ers this according to his 
own reference of blueness and transmits it to you in hi s own cipher. So we live in 
symbols, and dreams are a part of this symbolic proc ess. We are incapable of 
direct and immediate perception without th e symbols, the words, the prejudices 
and conclusions. The reason for this is also quite apparen t: it is part of the self- 102centred activity with its defences, resi stances, escapes and fears. There is a 
ciphered response in the activity of th e brain, and dreams must naturally be 
symbolic because during the waking hours we are incapabl e of direct response or 
perception.  
     Questioner: It seems to me that this th en is an inherent function of the brain.  
     Krishnamurti: Inherent means some thing permanent, inevit able and lasting. 
Surely any psychological state can be ch anged. Only the de ep, constant demand 
of the brain for the physical security of the organism is inherent. Symbols are a 
device of the brain to prot ect the psyche; this is the whole process of thought. 
The "me" is a symbol, not an actuality. Having created the symbol of the "me", 
thought identifies itself with its conclusion, with the fo rmula, and then defends it: 
all misery and sorrow  come from this.  
     Questioner: Then how do I get around it?  
     Krishnamurti: When you ask how to get around i t, you are still holding on to 
the symbol of the "me", which is fictit ious; you become something separate from 
what you see, and so  duality arises.  
     Questioner: May I come ba ck another day to continue this?  
     * * *  
     Questioner: You were good enough to le t me come back, an d I should like to 
continue where we left off. We were ta lking about symbols in dreams and you 
pointed out that we live by symbols, deciphering them according to our 
gratification. We do this not only in drea ms but in everyday life; it is our usual 
behaviour. Most of our actions are based on the interpretation of the symbols or 
images that we have. Strangely, after ha ving talked with you the other day, my 
dreams have taken a peculiar turn. I have ha d very disturbing  dreams and the 
interpretation of those dreams took plac e as they were happening within the  103dreams. It was a simultaneous process; the dream was being interpreted by the 
dreamer. This has never ha ppened to me before.  
     Krishnamurti: During our waking h ours, there is always the observer, different 
from the observed, the actor, separate fr om his action. In the same way there is 
the dreamer separate from his dream. He thinks it is separate from himself and 
therefore in need of interpretation. But is  the dream separate from the dreamer, 
and is there any need to in terpret it? When the observ er is the observed what 
need is there to interpret, to judge, to ev aluate? This need woul d exist only if the 
observer were different from the thing observed. This  is very important to 
understand. We have separated the thi ng observed from the observer and from 
this arises not only the problem of interp retation but also c onflict, and the many 
problems connected with it. This division is an illusi on. This division between 
groups, races, nationalities, is fictitious . We are beings, undivided by names, by 
labels. When the labels become  all important, division takes place, and then wars 
and all other struggles come into being.  
     Questioner: How then do I understand the content of the dream? It must have 
significance. Is it an accident that I dream of some particular event or person?  
     Krishnamurti: We should  really look at this quite di fferently. Is there anything to 
understand? When the observer thinks he is different from the thing observed 
there is an attempt to understand that which is outside himself. The same 
process goes on within him. There is the observer wishing to understand the 
thing he observes, wh ich is himself. But when the ob server is the observed, there 
is no question of understanding; there is on ly observation. You say that there is 
something to understand in the dream, ot herwise there would be no dream, you 
say that the dream is a hint  of something unresolved that one should understand. 
You use the word "understand", and in that  very word is the dualistic process. 
You think there is an "I", and a thing to be understood , whereas in reality these  104two entities are one and the same. Therefore your sear ch for a meaning in the 
dream is the action of conflict.  
     Questioner: Would you say the drea m is an expression of something in the 
mind? Krishnamurti: Obviously it is.  
     Questioner: I do not understand how it is possible to regard a dream in the 
way you are describing it. If it has no  significance, why does it exist?  
     Krishnamurti: The "I" is the dreamer, and the dreamer wants to see 
significance in the dream which he has  invented or projected, so both are 
dreams, both are unreal. This unreality has become real to the dreamer, to the 
observer who thinks of himself as separate. The whole problem of dream 
interpretation arises out of this separati on, this division between the actor and the 
action.  
     Questioner: I am getting more and mo re confused, so may we go over it again 
differently? I can see that a dream is the product of my mind and not separate 
from it, but dreams seem to come from levels of the mind which have not been 
explored, and so they seem to be intima tions of something alive in the mind.  
     Krishnamurti: It is not your partic ular mind in which there are hidden things. 
Your mind is the mind of man; your cons ciousness is the whole of man. But when 
you particularize it as your mind, you limit its activity, an d because of this 
limitation, dreams arise. During waking  hours observe withou t the observer, who 
is the expression of limitation. Any division is a limitation.  Having divided itself into 
a "me" and a "not me", the "me", the obser ver, the dreamer, has many problems - 
among them dreams and the interpretation of dreams. In any case, you will see 
the significance or the value of a dr eam only in a limited way because the 
observer is always limited.  The dreamer perpetuates hi s own limitation, therefore 
the dream is always the expression of the incomplete, never of the whole.   105     Questioner: Pieces are brought back  from the moon in or der to understand the 
composition of the moon. In the same way we try to understand human thinking 
by bringing back pieces from our drea ms, and examining what they express.  
     Krishnamurti: The expressions of the mind are the fragments of the mind. 
Each fragment expresses itself in its ow n way and contradicts other fragments. A 
dream may contradict another dream, one action another action, one desire 
another desire. The mind lives in this confusion. A part of the mind says it must 
understand another part, such as a drea m, an action or a desire. So each 
fragment has its own observer, its own ac tivity; then a super-observer tries to 
bring them all into harmony. The super-obse rver is also a fragment of the mind. It 
is these contradictio ns, these divisions, that breed dreams.  
     So the real question is not the interpretation or th e understanding of a 
particular dream; it is the perception that these many fragments are contained in 
the whole. Then you see yourself as a wh ole and not as a frag ment of a whole.  
     Questioner: Are you saying, sir, that one should be aware during the day of 
the whole movement of life, no t just one's family life, or  business life, or any other 
individual aspect of life?  
     Krishnamurti: Consci ousness is the whol e of man and does not belong to a 
particular man. When there is the consci ousness of one particular man there is 
the complex problem of frag mentation, contradiction and war. When there is 
awareness of the total movement of lif e in a human being during the waking 
hours, what need is there fo r dreams at all? This total awareness, this attention, 
puts an end to fragme ntation and to division. When there is no conflict 
whatsoever the mind has no need for dreams.  
     Questioner: This certainly opens a door through which I see many things.   106Tradition  
 Questioner: Can one really be free of tr adition? Can one be free of anything at 
all? Or is it a matter of sidestepping it and not bein g concerned with any of it? 
You talk a great deal about the past and its conditioning  - but can I be really free 
of this whole background of my life? Or can I merely modi fy the background 
according to the various outward demands and challenges, adjust myself to it 
rather than become free of it? It seems to me that this is  one of the most 
important things, and I'd like to understan d it because I always feel that I am 
carrying a burden, the weight  of the past. I would like to put it down and walk 
away from it, never come back  to it. Is that possible?  
     Krishnamurti: Doesn't tradition me an carrying the past ov er to the present? 
The past is not only one's particular set of inheritances but also  the weight of all 
the collective thought of a particular group of people who have liv ed in a particular 
culture and tradition. One carries the ac cumulated knowledge and experience of 
the race and the family. All this is the past - the carrying over from the known to 
the present - which shapes th e future. Is not the teaching  of all history a form of 
tradition? You are asking if on e can be free of all this. First of all, why does one 
want to be free? Why does one want to put down this burden? Why?  
     Questioner: I think it's  fairly simple. I don't want to  be the past - I want to be 
myself; I want to be cleansed of this whol e tradition so that I can be a new human 
being. I think in most of us  there is this feeling of wanting to be born anew.  
     Krishnamurti: You cannot possibly be the new just by wishing for it. Or by 
struggling to be new. You ha ve not only to understand the past but also you have 
to find out who you are. Are you not th e past? Are you not the continuation of 
what has been, modified by the present?  
     Questioner: My actions and my thoughts are, but my existence isn't.   107     Krishnamurti: Can you separate the two, action and thought, from existence? 
Are not thought, action, ex istence, living and relati onship all one? This 
fragmentation into "me" and "not-me" is part of this tradition.  
     Questioner: Do you mean that when I am not thinking, wh en the past is not 
operating, I am obliterated, that I have ceased to exist?  
     Krishnamurti: Don't let us ask too many questions, but consider what we 
began with. Can one be free of the past - not only the recent but the immemorial, 
the collective, the racial, the human, th e animal? You are all that, you are not 
separate from that. And you are asking whether you can put all that aside and be 
born anew. The "you" is that, and when you wish to be re born as a ne w entity, the 
new entity you imagine is a projection of the old, covered over with the word 
"new". But underneath, you are the past. So the question is, can the past be put 
aside or does a modified form of tradition continue for ever, changing, accumulating, discarding, but always the past in differ ent combinations? The past 
is the cause and the present  is the effect, and today,  which is the effect of 
yesterday, becomes t he cause of tomorrow. This chai n is the way of thought, for 
thought is the past. You are asking w hether one can stop this movement of 
yesterday into today. Can one look at the past to examine it, or is that not 
possible at all? To look at it  the observer must be outsid e it - and he isn't. So here 
arises another issue. If the observer himself is the past  then how can the past be 
isolated for observation?  
     Questioner: I can look  at something objectively....  
     Krishnamurti: But you,  who are the observer, are th e past trying to look at 
itself. You can objectify yourself only as  an image which you have put together 
through the years in every form of re lationship, and so the "you" which you 
objectify is memory and imagination, the pa st. You are trying to look at yourself 
as though you were a different entity from the one who is looking, but you are the 
past, with its old judgements, evaluations and so on . The action of the past is  108looking at the memory of the past. Theref ore there is never relief from the past. 
The continuous examination of  the past by the past perp etuates the past; this is 
the very action of the past, and this is the very essence of tradition.  
     Questioner: Then what action is possible? If I am the past - and I can see that 
I am - then whatever I do to chisel away the past is adding to it. So I am left 
helpless! What can I do? I ca n't pray because the invention of a god is again the 
action of the past. I can't look to another , for the other is also the creation of my 
despair. I can't run away from it all becaus e at the end of it I am still there with my 
past. I can't identify myself with some image which is not of t he past beca use that 
image is my own projection too. Seeing a ll this, I am really left helpless, and in 
despair.  
     Krishnamurti: Why do you call it helplessness and despair? Aren't you 
translating what you see as  the past into an emot ional anxiety because you 
cannot achieve a certain result? in so doing you are again making the past act. 
Now, can you look at all th is movement of the past, with all its traditions, without 
wanting to be free of it, change  it, modify it or run away from it - simply observe it 
without any reaction?  
     Questioner: But as we have been saying all through this conversation, how 
can I observe the past if I am the pa st? I can't look at it at all!  
     Krishnamurti: Can you look at yourself, who are the past, without any 
movement of thought, which is the pa st? If you can look without thinking, 
evaluating, liking, disliking, judging, then there is a looking with eyes that are not 
touched by the past. It is to look in silence, without t he noise of thought. In this 
silence there is neither the observer nor the thing which he is  looking at as the 
past.  
     Questioner: Are you saying th at when you look without evaluation or 
judgement the past ha s disappeared? But it hasn't - there are still the thousands  109of thoughts and actions and all the petti ness which were rampant only a moment 
ago. I look at them and they are still there. How can you say that the past has 
disappeared? It may momentar ily have stopped acting....  
     Krishnamurti: When the mind is sil ent that silence is a new dimension, and 
when there is any rampant pettiness it is instantly dissolved, because the mind 
has now a different quality of energy which is not th e energy engendered by the 
past. This is what matters: to  have that energy that di spels the carrying over of 
the past. The carrying over of the past is  a different kind of  energy. The silence 
wipes the other out, the greater absorbs the lesser and remains untouched. It is 
like the sea, receiving the dirty river and re maining pure. This is  what matters. It is 
only this energy that can wi pe away the past. Either th ere is silence or the noise 
of the past. In this silence the noise ceases and the new is this silenc e. It is not 
that you are made new. Th is silence is infinite an d the past is limited. The 
conditioning of the past breaks do wn in the fullness of silence.   110Conditioning  
 Questioner: You have talked a great de al about conditioning and have said 
that one must be free of this bondage, other wise one remains imprisoned always. 
A statement of this kind se ems so outrageous and unac ceptable! Most of us are 
very deeply conditioned and we hear th is statement and throw up our hands and 
run away from such extravagant expression,  but I have taken you seriously - for, 
after all, you have more or le ss given your life to this ki nd of thing, not  as a hobby 
but with deep seriousness - and therefore I should like to discuss it with you to 
see how far the human being ca n uncondition himself. Is it really possible, and if 
so, what does it mean? Is it possible for me, having li ved in a world of habits, 
traditions and the acc eptance of orthodox notions in  so many matte rs - is it 
possible for me really to throw off this deep-rooted conditioni ng? What exactly do 
you mean by conditioning, and what do yo u mean by freedom from conditioning?  
     Krishnamurti: Let us take the fi rst question first. We are conditioned - 
physically, nervously, mentally - by the cl imate we live in and the food we eat, by 
the culture in which we live, by the whol e of our social, religious and economic 
environment, by our experience, by ed ucation and by family pressures and 
influences. All these are the factors which condition us. Our conscious and 
unconscious responses to all the challeng es of our environm ent - intellectual, 
emotional, outward and inward - all th ese are the action of conditioning. 
Language is conditioning; all thought is th e action, the response of conditioning.  
     Knowing that we are conditioned we  invent a divine agen cy which we piously 
hope will get us out of this mechanical st ate. We either postulate its existence 
outside or inside ourselves - as the atma n, the soul, the Kingdom of Heaven 
which is within, and who knows what else! To these beliefs we cling desperately, 
not seeing that they themselves are part of the conditioning factor which they are 
supposed to dest roy or redeem. So not being able to uncondit ion ourselves in this 
world, and not even seeing that conditi oning is the problem, we think that  111freedom is in Heaven, in Moksha, in Nirvan a. In the Christian myth of original sin 
and in the whole eastern doctrine of Sa msara, one sees that the factor of 
conditioning has been felt, th ough rather obscurely. If it  had been clearly seen, 
naturally these doctrines and myths would not have ar isen. Nowadays the 
psychologists also try to get to grips with this problem,  and in doing so condition 
us still further. Thus the relig ious specialists have condit ioned us, the social order 
has conditioned us, the family which is part of  it has conditioned us. All this is the 
past which makes up the op en as well as the hidden layers of the mind. En 
passant it is interesting to note that the so -called individual doesn't exist at all, for 
his mind draws on the common reservoir of  conditioning which he shares with 
everybody else, so the division betwee n the community and the individual is 
false: there is only conditioni ng. This conditioning is acti on in all relationships - to 
things, people and ideas.  
     Questioner: Then what am I to do to  free myself from it all? To live in this 
mechanical state is not living at all, and yet all action, all will, all judgements are 
conditioned - so there is apparently no thing I can do about conditioning which 
isn't conditioned! I am tied hand and foot.  
     Krishnamurti: The very factor of co nditioning in the past, in the present and in 
the future, is the "me" which thinks in term s of time, the "me" which exerts itself; 
and now it exerts itself in the demand to be free; so the root of all conditioning,is 
the thought which is the "me". The "me" is  the very essence of the past, the "me" 
is time, the "me" is sorrow - the "me" endeavours to free it self from itself, the "me" 
makes efforts, struggles to achieve, to de ny, to become. This struggle to become 
is time in which there is confusion and the greed for th e more and the better. The 
"me" seeks security and not finding it transfers the se arch to heaven; the very 
"me" that identifies itself wi th something greater in which it hopes to lose itself - 
whether that be the natio n, the ideal or some god - is the factor of conditioning.   112     Questioner: You have taken everythi ng away from me. What am I without this 
"me"?  
     Krishnamurti: If there is no "me" you are unconditioned,  which means you are 
nothing.  
     Questioner: Can the "me" end without the effort of the "me"?  
     Krishnamurti: The effort to become  something is the resp onse, the action, of 
conditioning. Questioner: How can the action of the "me" stop?  
     Krishnamurti: It can stop only if yo u see this whole thing,  the whole business 
of it. If you see it in action, which is in relationship, the seeing is the ending of the 
"me". Not only is this seeing an action wh ich is not conditioned but also it acts 
upon conditioning.  
     Questioner: Do you mean to say that  the brain - which is the result of vast 
evolution with its infinite cond itioning - can free itself?  
     Krishnamurti: The brain is the result of time; it is conditioned to protect itself 
physically, but when it tries to protect itself psychologically then the "me" begins, 
and all our misery starts. It is this effort to prot ect itself psychologically that is the 
affirmation of the "me". The brain can learn, can ac quire knowledge 
technologically, but when it acquires knowledge psychologi cally then that 
knowledge asserts itself in relationship as the "me" with its experiences, its will 
and its violence. This is what brings divi sion, conflict and sorrow to relationship.  
     Questioner: Can this brain be still and only operate when  it has to work 
technologically - only operate when know ledge is demanded in action, as for 
example in learning a language, driv ing a car or building a house?  
     Krishnamurti: The danger in this  is the dividing of  the brain into the 
psychological and the technological. Th is again becomes a contradiction, a  113conditioning, a theory. The real question is whether the brain, the whole of it, can 
be still, quiet, and respond efficiently only when  it has to in technology or in living. 
So we are not concerned with the psycholog ical or the technolo gical; we ask only, 
can this whole mind be completely still a nd function only when it has to? We say 
it can and this is the understan ding of what meditation is.  
     * * *  
     Questioner: If I may I should like to  continue where we le ft off yesterday. You 
may remember that I asked tw o questions: I asked what is conditioning and what 
is freedom from conditioning,  and you said let us take the first question first. We 
hadn't time to go into the se cond question, so I should like to ask today, what is 
the state of the mind that is free from all its conditioning? After talking with you 
yesterday it became very clear to me how  deeply and strongly  I am conditioned, 
and I saw - at least I thin k I saw - an opening, a crack in this structure of 
conditioning. I talked the matter over with  a friend and in taking certain factual 
instances of conditioning I saw very cl early how deeply and venomously one's 
actions are affected by it. As you said at the end, me ditation is the emptying of 
the mind of all conditioning so that there is no distortion or ill usion. How s one to 
be free of all distortion, all illusion? What is illusion?  
     Krishnamurti: It is so easy to dece ive oneself, so easy to convince oneself of 
anything at all. The fee ling that one must be something is the beginning of 
deception, and, of course, this idealistic attitu de leads to various forms of 
hypocrisy. What makes illusion? Well, on e of the factors is this constant 
comparison between what is and what should be, or what might be, this 
measurement between the good and the bad - thought tr ying to improve itself, the 
memory of pleasure, trying to get more pleasure, and so  on. It is this desire for 
more, this dissatisfaction,  which makes one ac cept or have faith in something, 
and this must inevitably lead to every fo rm of deception and illusion. It is desire 
and fear, hope and despair, that proj ect the goal, the conclusion to be  114experienced. Therefore this experience ha s no reality. All so-called religious 
experiences follow this pattern. The very  desire for enlight enment must also 
breed the acceptance of authority, and this is the opposite of enlightenment. 
Desire, dissatisfaction, fe ar, pleasure, wanting more, wanting to change, all of 
which is measuremen t - this is the way of illusion.  
     Questioner: Do you really ha ve no illusion at all about anything?  
     Krishnamurti: I am no t all the time measuring myse lf or others. This freedom 
from measurement comes about  when you are really livin g with what is - neither 
wishing to change it nor judging it in terms of good and bad. Living with 
something is not the acceptance of it: it is there whether you accept it or not. 
Living with something is not identi fying yourself with it either.  
     Questioner: Can we go back to the qu estion of what this freedom is that one 
really wants? This desire for freedom expresses itself in everybody, sometimes in the stupidest ways, but I think one can say that in the human heart there is 
always this deep longing for freedom wh ich is never realized; there is this 
incessant struggle to be free. I know I am not free; I am caught in so many wants. 
How am I to be free, and what does it mean to be really  honestly free?  
     Krishnamurti: Perhaps this may help us to understand it: to tal negation is that 
freedom. To negate everything  we consider to be posi tive, to negate the total 
social morality, to negate all inward acce ptance of authority, to negate everything 
one has said or concluded ab out reality, to negate all tradition, all teaching, all 
knowledge except technological knowledge, to  negate all expe rience, to negate 
all the drives which stem from remembered  or forgotten pleasu res, to negate all 
fulfilment, to negate all commitments to act in a particular way, to negate all 
ideas, all principles, all th eories. Such negation is the most positive action, 
therefore it is freedom.   115     Questioner: If I chisel away at this, bit by bit, I shall go on for ever and that 
itself will be my bondage. C an it all all wither away in  a flash, can I negate the 
whole human deception, all the valu es and aspiration and standards, 
immediately? Is it really possible? Doesn't it require enormous capacity, which I 
lack, enormous understanding, to see all th is in a flash and leave it exposed to 
the light, to that intelligence you have ta lked about? I wonder , sir, if you know 
what this entails. To ask me, an ordina ry man with an ordinary education, to 
plunge into something which seems like an incredible no thingness.... Can I do it? 
I don't even know what it means to jump in to it! It's like asking me to become all 
of a sudden the most beautif ul, innocent, lovely human be ing. You see I am really 
frightened now, not the way I was frig htened before, I am  faced now with 
something which I know  is true, and yet my utter inca pacity to do it binds me. I 
see the beauty of this th ing, to be really comp letely nothing, but....  
     Krishnamurti: You know, it is only when there is emptiness in oneself, not the 
emptiness of a shallow mind but the emptiness that come s with the total negation 
of everything one has been and sh ould be and will be - it is  only in this emptiness 
that there is creation; it is only in this emptiness that something new can take 
place. Fear is the thought of the unknown,  so you are really frightened of leaving 
the known, the attachments, the satisf actions, the pleasurable memories, the 
continuity and security whic h give comfort. Thought is co mparing this with what it 
thinks is emptiness. This imagination of emptiness is fear, so fear is thought. To 
come back to your question  - can the mind negate ever ything it has known, the 
total content of its own conscious and unconscious self, which is the very 
essence of yourself? Can you negate yourself completely? If not, there is no 
freedom. Freedom is not freedom from something - that is only a reaction; 
freedom comes in total denial.  
     Questioner: But what is the good of having such freedom ? You are asking me 
to die, aren't you?   116     Krishnamurti: Of course! I wonder  how you are using the word "good" when 
you say what is the good of  this freedom? Good in terms of what? The known? 
Freedom is the absolute good and its action is  the beauty of ever yday life. In this 
freedom alone there is living, and withou t it how can there be  love? Everything 
exists and has its being in this freedom. It is everywhe re and nowhere. It has no 
frontiers. Can you die now to  everything you know and not wait for tomorrow to 
die? This freedom is eterni ty and ecstasy and love.   117Happiness  
 Questioner: What is happiness? I have al ways tried to find it but somehow it 
hasn't come my way. I see people enjoying themselves in  so many different ways 
and many of the things they do seem so  immature and childi sh. I suppose they 
are happy in their own way, but I want a different kind of happiness. I have had 
rare intimations that it might be possib le to get it, but so mehow it has always 
eluded me. I wonder what I can do to  feel really co mpletely happy?  
     Krishnamurti: Do you think happiness is an end in itse lf? Or does it come as a 
secondary thing in living intelligently?  
     Questioner: I think it is an end in  itself because if there is happiness then 
whatever you do will be harmonious; then you will do things effortlessly, easily, 
without any friction. I am sure that whatev er you do out of th is happiness will be 
right.  
     Krishnamurti: But is this so? Is happ iness an end in itself? Virtue is not an end 
in itself. If it is, then it becomes a very  small affair. Can yo u seek happiness? If 
you do then probably you will find an imitatio n of it in all sorts of distractions and 
indulgences. This is pleasure. What is the relationship between pleasure and 
happiness?  
     Questioner. I have never asked myself. Krishnamurti: Pleasure which we 
pursue is mistakenly called happiness, but can you pu rsue happiness, as you 
pursue pleasure? Surely we must be very clear as to whether pleasure is 
happiness. Pleasure is gratification, satisfaction, indulgence, entertainment, 
stimulation. Most of us think pleasure is happiness, and the greatest pleasure we 
consider to be the greatest happine ss. And is happiness the opposite of 
unhappiness? Are you trying to be happy because you are unhappy and 
dissatisfied? Has happiness got an opposite at all? Has love got an opposite? Is 
your question about happiness th e result of being unhappy?   118     Questioner: I am unhappy like the re st of the world and naturally I don't want 
to be, and that is what is dr iving me to seek happiness.  
     Krishnamurti: So happiness to you is  the opposite of unhappiness. If you were 
happy you wouldn't seek i t. So what is important is  not happiness but whether 
unhappiness can end. That is  the real problem, isn't it? You are asking about 
happiness because you are unhappy and yo u ask this question without finding 
out whether happiness is the opposite of unhappiness.  
     Questioner: If you put it that way, I accept it. So my concern is how to be free 
from the misery I am in.  
     Krishnamurti: Which is more impo rtant - to understand unhappiness or to 
pursue happiness? If you pursue happ iness it becomes an escape from 
unhappiness and th erefore it will always remain, covered over perhaps, hidden, 
but always there, festering inside. So what  is your question now? Questioner: My 
question now is why am I mi serable? You have very neat ly pointed out to me my 
real state, rather than given me the answe r I want, so now I am  faced with this 
question, how am I to get ri d of the misery I am in?  
     Krishnamurti: Can an outside agency  help you to get rid of your own misery, 
whether that outside agency be God, a master, a drug or a saviour? Or can one 
have the intelligence to understand the nature of unhappiness and deal with it 
immediately?  
     Questioner: I have come to you be cause I thought you might help me, so you 
could call yourself an outside agency. I want help and I don't care who gives it to 
me.  
     Krishnamurti: In accepting or giving help several things are involved. If you accept it blindly you will be caught in the trap of one authority or another, which 
brings with it various other problems, such  as obedience and fear. So if you start 
off wanting help, not only do you not ge t help - because no body can help you  119anyway - but in addition yo u get a whole series of ne w problems; you are deeper 
in the mire than ever before.  
     Questioner: I think I understand a nd accept that. I have never thought it out 
clearly before. How then c an I develop the intelligence to deal with unhappiness 
on my own, and im mediately? If I had this intellig ence surely I wouldn't be here 
now, I wouldn't be asking yo u to help me. So my questi on now is, can I get this 
intelligence in order to solve the problem of unhap piness and thereby attain 
happiness? Krishnamurti: You are saying that  this intelligence is  separate from its 
action. The action of this intelligence is the seeing and the understanding of the 
problem,itself. The two are not separate  and successive; you don't first get 
intelligence and then use it on the problem like  a tool. it is on e of the sicknesses 
of thinking to say that one should have the capacity firs t and then use it, the idea 
or the principle first and then  apply it. This itse lf is the very abse nce of intelligence 
and the origin of problems. This is frag mentation. We live this way and so we 
speak of happiness an d unhappiness, hate an d love, and so on.  
     Questioner: Perhaps this is i nherent in the structure of language.  
     Krishnamurti: Perhaps it is but let' s not make too much fu ss about it here and 
wander away from the iss ue. We are saying t hat intelligence, an d the action of 
that intelligence - which is seeing the problem of unhappiness - are one 
indivisibly. Also that this is not sepa rate from ending unhappiness or getting 
happiness.  
     Questioner: How am I to get that intelligence?  
     Krishnamurti: Have you unders tood what we have  been saying?  
     Questioner: Yes.  
     Krishnamurti: But if you have unders tood you have seen th at this seeing is 
intelligence. The only thing you can do is to see; you cannot cultivate intelligence  120in order to see. Seeing is not the cu ltivation of intelligence. Seeing is more 
important than intelligence, or happiness, or  unhappiness. There is only seeing or 
not seeing. All the rest - happiness, unhappiness and intelligence - are just 
words.  
     Questioner: What is it, then, to see?  
     Krishnamurti: To see means to un derstand how thought creates the opposites. 
What thought creates is not real. To s ee means to understand the nature of 
thought, memory, conflict, id eas; to see all this as  a total process is to 
understand. This is intelligence; seeing to tally is intelligence; seeing fragmentarily 
is the lack of intelligence.  
     Questioner: I am a bit bewildered. I think I understand, but it is rather tenuous; 
I must go slowly. What you are saying is, see and listen comple tely. You say this 
attention is intelligence and you say that  it must be immediate. One can only see 
now. I wonder if I really see now, or am I going home to think over what you have 
said, hoping to see later?  
     Krishnamurti: Then you will never see; in thinking about it you will never see it 
because thinking prevent s seeing. Both of us have un derstood what it means to 
see. This seeing is not an essence or an abstraction or an idea . You cannot see if 
there is nothing to see. Now you have a problem of  unhappiness. See it 
completely, including your wanting to  be happy and how thought creates the 
opposite. See the search for happiness and the seekin g help in order to get 
happiness. See disappointment, hope, fear. A ll of this must be seen comple- tely, 
as a whole, not separately. See all this now, give your whole attention to it.  
     Questioner: I am st ill bewildered. I don't know whether I have got the essence 
of it, the whole point. I want to close my ey es and go into myself to see if I have 
really understood this thing. If I have then I have solved my problem.   121Learning  
 Questioner: You have ofte n talked about learning. I don't quite know what you 
mean by it. We are taught to learn at school and at the University, and life also 
teaches us many things - to adjust ourselves to environment and to our 
neighbours, to our wife or husband, to  our children. We se em to learn from 
almost everything, but I am sure that when you speak about learning this isn't 
quite what you mean becaus e you also seem to deny experience as a teacher. 
But when you deny experience aren't you denying all lear ning? After all, through 
experience, both in technology and in huma n everyday living, we learn everything 
we know. So could we go  into this question?  
     Krishnamurti: Learning through experi ence is one thing - it  is the accumulation 
of conditioning - and learning all the time, not only about objective things but also 
about oneself, is something quite different. There is the accumulation which 
brings about conditioning - this we know - and there is the learning which we 
speak about. This learning is  observation - to observe without accumulation, to 
observe in freedom. This obse rvation is not directed fr om the past. Let us keep 
those two things clear.  
     What do we learn from experience? We learn things like languages, 
agriculture, manners, going to the moon, medicine, mathematics. But have we 
learnt about war through making war? We  have learnt to make  war more deadly, 
more efficient, but we haven't learnt not to make war. Our experience in warfare 
endangers the surviv al of the human race. Is th is learning? You may build a 
better house, but has experience taught yo u how to live more nobly inside it? We 
have learnt through experience that  fire burns and that has become our 
conditioning but we have also  learnt through our conditi oning that nationalism is 
good. Yet experience should also teach us  that nationalism is deadly. All the 
evidence is there. The religious experience, as based on ou r conditioning, has 
separated man from man. Ex perience has taught us to  have better food, clothes  122and shelter, but it has no t taught us that social injustice prevents the right 
relationship between man and man. So experience co nditions and strengthens 
our prejudices, our peculiar tendencies and our particular dogmas and beliefs. 
We do not learn what stupid nonsense all this is; we do not learn to live in the 
right relationship with other men. This right relationship is  love. Experience 
teaches me to strengthen the family as a unit opposed to so ciety and to other 
families. This brings about strife and division, which ma kes it ever more important 
to strengthen the family pr otectively, and so the vicious circle continues. We 
accumulate, and call this "l earning through experience", but more an d more this 
learning brings about fragmentation , narrowness and specialization.  
     Questioner: Are you making out a case against technological learning and 
experience, against science and all accu mulated knowledge? If we turn our backs 
on that we shall go ba ck to savagery.  
     Krishnamurti: No, I am not making out such a case at all. I think we are 
misunderstanding each other. We said t hat there are two kinds of learning: 
accumulation through experience, and acting  from that accumulation, which is the 
past, and which is absolutely necessary wherever the action  of knowledge is 
necessary. We are not against th is; that would be too absurd!  
     Questioner: Gandhi tried to keep the machine out of life and started all that 
business which they call "Home industries" or  "Cottage industries " in India. Yet he 
used modern mechanized transport. This shows the inconsiste ncy and hypocrisy 
of his position.  
     Krishnamurti: Let's leave other people  out of this. We are saying that there are 
two kinds of learning - on e, acting through the accumulation of knowledge and 
experience, and the other, learning without accumulation, but learning all the time 
in the very act of living. The former is absolutely necessary in all technical 
matters, but relationship, behaviour, are not technica l matters, they are living 
things and you have to le arn about them all the time. If you act from what you  123have learnt about behaviour, then it becomes mechani cal and therefore 
relationship becomes routine.  
     Then there is another very import ant point: in all the learning which is 
accumulation and experience, pr ofit is the criterion that  determines the efficiency 
of the learning. And when the motive of profit operates in human relationships 
then it destroys those relationships because  it brings about isolation and division. 
When the learning of experience and ac cumulation enters the domain of human 
behaviour, the psychological domain, then it must inev itably destroy. Enlightened 
self-interest on the one hand is advancemen t, but on the other hand it is the very 
seat of mischief, misery an d confusion. Relationship ca nnot flower where there is 
self-interest of any kind, and that is wh y relationship cannot flower where it is 
guided by experience or memory.  
     Questioner: I see this , but isn't religious experience something different? I am 
talking about the experience gathered and passed on in  religious matters - the 
experiences of the saints and gurus, the ex perience of the philosophers. Isn't this 
kind of experience beneficial to us in our ignorance?  
     Krishnamurti: Not at all! The sain t must be recognised by  society and always 
conforms to society's notions of saintho od - otherwise he wouldn't be called a 
saint. Equally the gu ru must be recognised as su ch by his followers who are 
conditioned by tradition. So both the guru  and the disciple are part of the cultural 
and religious conditioning of the particular society in which they live. When they 
assert that they have come into contact with reality, that they know, then you may 
be quite sure that what they  know is not reality. What  t h e y  k n o w  i s  t h e i r  o w n  
projection from the past. So the man who says he know s, does not know. in all 
these so-called religious experiences a cognitive pr ocess of recognition is 
inherent. You can only recogn ise something you have k nown before, therefore it 
is of the past, therefore it is time-bi nding and not timeless. So-called religious 
experience does not bring benefit but mere ly conditions you according to your  124particular tradition, inclination, tendency and desire, and therefore encourages 
every form of illusion and isolation.  
     Questioner: Do you mean to sa y that you cannot experience reality? 
Krishnamurti: To experience implies that there must be an experiencer and the 
experiencer is the essence of all cond itioning. What he experiences is the 
already-known.  
     Questioner: What do you mean when  you talk about the experiencer? If there 
is no experiencer do you mean you disappear?  
     Krishnamurti: Of course. The "you " is the past and as long as the "you" 
remains or the "me" remains, that which is immense cannot be. The "me" with his 
shallow little mind, experi ence and knowledge, with his heart burdened with 
jealousies and anxieties - how can such an entity understand that which has no 
beginning and no ending, that which is ecstasy? So t he beginning of wisdom is to 
understand yourself. Begin understanding yourself.  
     Questioner: Is the experiencer differe nt from that which he experiences, is the 
challenge different from the re action to the challenge?  
     Krishnamurti: The experiencer is  the experienced, otherwise he could not 
recognise the experience and would not call it an experience; the experience is 
already in him before he recognises i t. So the past is al ways operating and 
recognising itself; the new be comes swallowed up by the old. Similarly it is the 
reaction which determines the challenge; the challeng e is the reaction, the two 
are not separate; without a reaction there would be  no challenge. So the 
experience of an experiencer, or the re action to a challenge which comes from 
the experiencer, are old, for they are determined by the expe riencer. If you come 
to think of it, the word "experience" means to go th rough something and finish 
with it and not store it up, but when we talk about ex perience we actually mean 
the opposite. Every time you speak of ex perience you speak of something stored  125from which action takes plac e, you speak of somethin g which you have enjoyed 
and demand to have again, or have dis liked and fear to have repeated.  
     So really to live is to le arn without the cumulative process.   126Self-Expression  
 Questioner: Expression seems to me so important. I must express myself as 
an artist otherwise I feel stifled and deepl y frustrated. Expression is part of one's 
existence. As an artist it is  as natural that I should give  myself to it as that a man 
should express his love for a woman in words and gesture s. But through all this 
expression there is a sort of pain whic h I don't quite understand. I think most 
artists would agree with me th at there is deep conflict in expressing one's deepest 
feelings on canvas, or in any other medium. I wonder if  one can ever be free of 
this pain, or does expr ession always bring pain?  
     Krishnamurti: What is the need of  expression, and wher e does the suffering 
come into all this? Isn't one always trying to expre ss more and more deeply, 
extravagantly, fully, and is one ever satisfied with wh at one has expressed? The 
deep feeling and the expressi on of it are not the same thing; there is a vast 
difference between the two, and there is always frustration wh en the expression 
doesn't correspond to the strong feeling. Probably this is one of the causes of 
pain, this discontent with the inadequacy of the utterance which the artist gives to 
his feeling. In this there is conflict and the conflict is a waste of energy. An artist 
has a strong feeling which is  fairly authentic; he expr esses it on canvas. This 
expression pleases some people and they buy his work; he gets money and 
reputation. His expression has been noticed and becomes fashionable. He 
refines it, pursues it, develops it, and is  all the time imitating himself. This 
expression becomes habitual and styliz ed; the expression becomes more and 
more important and finally more important than the feel ing; the feeling eventually 
evaporates. The artist is not left with  the social consequences of being a 
successful painter: the market  place of the salo n and the gallery, the connoisseur, 
the critics; he is enslaved by the society for which he paints. The feeling has long 
since disappeared, the expression is an empty shell remaining. Consequently 
even this expression eventually loses its attraction because it had nothing to  127express; it is a gesture, a word without a meaning. This  is part of the destructive 
process of society. This is the destruction of the good.  
     Questioner: Can't the feeling rema in, without getting lost in expression?  
     Krishnamurti: When expression becomes all-important because it is 
pleasurable, satisfying or profitable, th en there is a cleava ge between expression 
and feeling. When the feeling is the expres sion then the conflict doesn't arise, and 
in this there is no contradiction and henc e no conflict. But when profit and thought 
intervene, then this feeling is lost through greed. The pa ssion of feeling is entirely 
different from the passion of expression,  and most people are caught in the 
passion of expression. So th ere is always this divisi on between the good and the 
pleasurable.  
     Questioner: Can I live without being  caught in this cu rrent of greed?  
     Krishnamurti: If it is the feeling which is important yo u will never ask about 
expression. Either y ou have got the feeling or yo u haven't. If you ask about the 
expression, you are not asking about artistry but about profit. Artistry is that which 
is never taken into acco unt: it is the living.  
     Questioner: So what is it, to live? What is it to be, and to have that feeling 
which is complete in itself ? I have now understood that  expression is beside the 
point.  
     Krishnamurti: It is living without conflict.   128Passion  
 Questioner: What is passion ? You've talked about it and apparently you give it 
a special meaning. I don't think I know that meaning. Like every man I have 
sexual passion and passions for superficial things like  fast driving or  cultivating a 
beautiful garden. Most of us  indulge in some form of passionate activity. Talk 
about his special passion a nd you see a man's eyes spar kle. We know the word 
passion comes from the Gree k word for suffering, but th e feeling I get when you 
use this word is not one of suffering but ra ther of some driving quality like that of 
the wind which comes roaring out of the west, chasing the clouds and the rubbish 
before it. I'd like to possess that passion. How does one come by it? What is it 
passionate about? What is the passion you mean?  
     Krishnamurti: I think we should be clear that lust and passion are two different 
things. Lust is sustained by  thought, driven by thou ght, it grows and gathers 
substance in thought until it ex plodes - sexually, or, if it is  the lust for power, in its 
own violent forms of fulfilmen t. Passion is something entir ely different; it is not the 
product of thought nor the remembrance of a past event; it is not driven by any 
motive of fulfilment; it is not sorrow either.  
     Questioner: Is all sexual passion  lust? Sexual response is not always the 
result of thought; it may be contact as wh en you suddenly meet somebody whose 
loveliness overpowers you.  
     Krishnamurti: Wherever thought bu ilds up the image of pleasure it must 
inevitably be lust and not the freedom of passion. If pleasure is the main drive 
then it is lust. When sexual feeling is born out of pleasure it is lust. If it is born out 
of love it is not lust, even though gr eat delight may then be present. Here we 
must be clear and find out for ourselves whether love exclud es pleasure and 
enjoyment. When you see a cl oud and delight in its vast ness and the light on it, 
there is of course pleasure, but there is a great deal more than pleasure. We are  129not condemning this at all. If you keep returning to the cloud in thought, or in fact, 
for a stimulation, then you are indulging in an imaginative flight of fancy, and 
obviously here pleasure and th ought are the incentives operating. When you first 
looked at that cloud and sa w its beauty there was no su ch incentive of pleasure 
operating. The beauty in se x is the absence of the "me" , the ego, but the thought 
of sex is the affirmation of this ego, and that is pleasu re. This ego is  all the time 
either seeking pleasure or avoiding pain, wanting fulfilment and thereby inviting 
frustration. In all this the feeling of pa ssion is sustained a nd pursued by thought, 
and therefore it is no longer passion but pleasure. The hope, the pursuit, of 
remembered passion is pleasure.  
     Questioner: What is passion itself, then?  
     Krishnamurti: It has to do with jo y and ecstasy, which is not pleasure. In 
pleasure there is always a su btle form of effort - a s eeing, striving, demanding, 
struggling to keep it, to get it, In pass ion there is no demand and therefore no 
struggle. In passion there is  not the slightest shadow of  fulfilment, therefore there 
can be neither frustration no r pain, Passion is the freedom  from the "me", which is 
the centre of all fulfilment and pain. Passion does not de mand because it is, and I 
am not speaking of something static. Passion  is the austerity of self-abnegation in 
which the "you" and the "me" is not; therefore passion is the essence of life. It is 
this that moves and lives. But when though t brings in all the problems of having 
and holding, then passion ceases. Withou t passion creation is not possible.  
     Questioner: What do you mean by creation?  
     Krishnamurti: Freedom.  
     Questioner: What freedom?  
     Krishnamurti: Freedom from the "m e" which depends on environment and is 
the product of environment - the me which is put together by society and thought.  130This freedom is clarity, the light that is  not lit from the pas t. Passion is only the 
present.  
     Questioner: This has fired me with a strange new feeling.  
     Krishnamurti: That is the passion  of learning. Questioner: What particular 
action in my daily li ving will ensure that this pass ion is burning a nd operating?  
     Krishnamurti: Nothing will ensure it except the attention of  learning, which is 
action, which is now. In this there is the beauty of passion, which is the total 
abandonment of the "me" and its time.   131Order  
 Questioner: In your teaching there are a thousand details. in my living I must 
be able to resolve them a ll into one action, now, which permeate s all I do, 
because in my living I have only the one moment right be fore me in which to act. 
What is that one action in daily living which will bring all the details of your 
teaching to one point, like a py ramid inverted on its point?  
     Krishnamurti: ...dangerously!  
     Questioner: Or, to put it differently,  what is the one acti on which will bring the 
total intelligence of living into focu s in one instant in the present?  
     Krishnamurti: I think the question to ask is how to live a really intelligent, 
balanced, active life, in harm onious relationship with other human beings, without 
confusion, adjustment and misery. What is the one act that will summon this 
intelligence to operate in whatever you are doing? There is  so much misery, 
poverty and sorrow in the worl d. What are you, as a hum an being, to do facing all 
these human problems? If you use the oppor tunity to help others for your own 
fulfilment, then it is exploitation and misc hief. So we can put that aside from the 
beginning. The question really is, how are we to live a highly intelligent, orderly 
life without any kind of effort? It seems that we always approach this problem 
from the outside, asking our selves, "What am I to do, confronted with all the many 
problems of mankind - economic, social, human?" We want to work this out in 
terms of the outer.  
     Questioner: No, I am not asking you how I can tackle  or solve the problems of 
the world, economic, social or political. That would be too absurd! All I want to 
know is how to live righteously in this world exactly as it is, because it is as it is now, right here bef ore me, and I can't will it into any other shape. I must live now 
in this world as it is, and in these circumstances solve a ll the problems of living. I 
am asking how to make this living a life of  Dharma, which is that virtue that is not  132imposed from without, that does not confor m to any precept, is not cultivated by 
any thought.  
     Krishnamurti: Do you mean you want to find yourself  immediately, suddenly, in 
a state of grace which is gr eat intelligence, innocency, lo ve - to find yourself in 
this state without having a past or a future, and to act from this state?  
     Questioner: Yes! That is it exactly.  
     Krishnamurti: This has nothing to do with achievement, success or failure. 
There must surely be only on e way to live: what is it?  
     Questioner: That is my question.  
     Krishnamurti: To have inside yo u that light that ha s no beginning and no 
ending, that is not lit by your desire, th at is not yours or someone else's. When 
there is this inward ligh t, whatever you do will alwa ys be right and true.  
     Questioner: How do you get that light, now, without all the struggle, the 
search, the longing, the questioning?  
     Krishnamurti: It is only possible wh en you really die to the past completely, 
and this can be done only when there is complete order in the brain. The brain 
cannot stand disorder. If ther e is disorder all its activi ties will be contradictory, 
confused, miserable and it w ill bring about mischief in it self and around itself. This 
order is not the design of thought, the des ign of obedience to  a principle, to 
authority, or to some form of imagined goodness. It is disorder in the brain that 
brings about conflict; then all the various resistances cultivated by thought to 
escape from this disorder arise - religious and otherwise.  
     Questioner: How can this order be br ought about to a brain that is disorderly, 
contradictory, in itself?   133     Krishnamurti: It can be done by wa tchfulness throughout  the day, and then, 
before sleeping, by putting ev erything that has been done  during the day in order. 
In that way the brain does not go to sleep in disorder . This does not mean that 
the brain hypnotizes itself in to a state of order when there is really disorder in and 
about it. There must be or der during the day, and the summing up of this order 
before sleeping is the harmonious ending of the day. It is like a man who keeps 
accounts and balances them pr operly every evening so th at he starts afresh the 
next day, so that when he goes to sleep  his mind is quiet,  empty, not worried, 
confused, anxious or fearful. When he wake s up there is this light which is not the 
product of thought or of pleasure. This  light is intelligence and love. It is the 
negation of the disorder of the moralit y in which we have been brought up.  
     Questioner: Can I have this light immediately? That is the question I asked 
right at the beginning, only I put it differently.  
     Krishnamurti: You can have it im mediately when the "m e" is not. The "me" 
comes to an end when it sees for itself that it must end; the seeing is the light of 
understanding.   134The Individual And The Community  
 Questioner: I don't quite know how to ask this question but I have a strong 
feeling that relationship between the i ndividual and the community, these two 
opposing entities, has been a long history of mischief. The history of the world, of 
thought, of civilization, is, after all, t he history of the rela tionship between these 
two opposing entities. In all societies the individual is more or less suppressed; 
he must conform and fit into  the pattern which the theorists have determined. The 
individual is always trying to break out of these patte rns, and continuous battle 
between the two is the result. Religions  talk about the individual soul as 
something separate from the collective so ul. They emphasize the individual. In 
modern society - which has become so me chanical, standardized and collectively 
active - the individual is trying to identi fy himself, enquiring wh at he is, asserting 
himself. All struggle leads nowhere. My ques tion is, what is wr ong with all this?  
     Krishnamurti: The only thing that rea lly matters is that th ere be an action of 
goodness, love an d intelligence in living. Is goodnes s individual or collective, is 
love personal or impersonal , is intelligence yours, mine  or somebody else's? If it 
is yours or mine then it is not intelligence, or love, or goodness.  If goodness is an 
affair of the individual or of the collective, according to one's particular preference 
or decision, then it is no longer goodne ss. Goodness is not in  the backyard of the 
individual nor in the open fi eld of the collective; goodne ss flowers only in freedom 
from both. When there is this goodness, love and intellig ence, then action is not 
in terms of the individual or the collecti ve. Lacking goodness, we divide the world 
into the individual and t he collective, and further divide the collective into 
innumerable groups according to religio n, nationality and class. Having created 
these divisions we try to bridge them by forming ne w groups which are again 
divided from other groups. We see that ev ery great religion supp osedly exists to 
bring about the brotherhood of  man and, in actual fact, prevents it. We always try  135to reform that which is  already corrupt. We do n't eradicate corruption 
fundamentally but simply rearrange it.  
     Questioner: Are you saying that we need not waste ti me in these endless 
bargainings between the individu al and the collective, or tr y to prove that they are 
different or that they are similar? Are you saying that only goodness, love and 
intelligence are the issue, and that th ese lie beyond the individual or the 
collective?  
     Krishnamurti: Yes.  
     Questioner: So the real questi on seems to be how love, goodness and 
intelligence can act in daily living.  
     Krishnamurti: If these act, then the question  of the individual  and the collective 
is academic.  
     Questioner: How are they to act?  
     Krishnamurti: They can act only in re lationship: all existence is in relationship. 
So the first thing is to become aware of  one's relationship to everything and 
everybody, and to see how in  this relationship the "m e" is born and acts. This 
"me" that is both the collective and the individual; it is the "me" that separates; it is 
the "me" that acts collectively or indivi dually, the "me" that creates heaven and 
hell. To be aware of this is to understand it. And the understanding of it is the 
ending of it. The ending of it is goodness, love an d intelligence.   136Meditation And Energy  
 Questioner: This morning I should like to go into the deeper meaning, or 
deeper sense, of meditation . I have practised many form s of it, including a little 
Zen. There are various schools which teac h awareness but they  all seem rather 
superficial, so can we leave all that aside and go into it more deeply?  
     Krishnamurti: We must  also set aside the whole me aning of authority, because 
in meditation any form of authority, either one's own or the authority of another, 
becomes an impediment a nd prevents freedom - prevents a freshness, a 
newness. So authority, c onformity and imitation must  be set aside completely. 
Otherwise you merely imitate, follow w hat has been said, and that makes the 
mind very dull and stupid. In that there is no freedom. Your past experience may 
guide, direct or establish a new path, an d so even that must go. Then only can 
one go into this very deep  and extraordinarily import ant thing called meditation. 
Meditation is the essence of energy.  
     Questioner: For many years I have tried to see that  I do not become a slave to 
the authority of someone else or to a pa ttern. Of course there is a danger of 
deceiving myself but as we go along I shall probably find out. But when you say 
that meditation is the essence of energy, what do you mean by  the words energy 
and meditation? Krishnamurti : Every movement of thou ght every action demands 
energy. Whatever you do or  think needs energy, and this energy can be 
dissipated through conflict, through va rious forms of un necessary thought, 
emotional pursuits and sentimental activiti es. Energy is wasted  in conflict which 
arises in duality, in the "me" and the "not-me", in the division between the 
observer and the observed, the thinker and the thought. When this wastage is no 
longer taking place there is a quality of energy which can be called an awareness 
- an awareness in which there is no evaluation, judgement, condemnation or 
comparison but merely an attentive observ ation, a seeing of things exactly as  137they are, both inwardly and outwardly, without the inte rference of thought, which 
is the past.  
     Questioner: This I find very difficult  to understand. If ther e were no thought at 
all, would it be possible to recognise a tr ee, or my wife or neighbour? Recognition 
is necessary, isn't it, when you look at a tree or the woman next door?  
     Krishnamurti: When you observe a tree is recognition necessary? When you 
look at that tree, do you say it is a tree or do you just look? If you begin to 
recognise it as an elm, an oak or a mango tree then the past interferes with direct 
observation. In the same way, when you look at your wife, if you look with 
memories of annoyances or pleasures you are not really looking at her but at the 
image which you have in your mind about her. That prevents direct perception: 
direct perception does not need recognition. Outward recognition of your wife, 
your children, your house or your neighbour is, of course necess ary, but why 
should there be an interference of the past  in the eyes, the mi nd and the heart? 
Doesn't it prevent you fr om seeing clearly? When you condemn or have an 
opinion about something, that opinion or  prejudice distorts observation.  
     Questioner: Yes, I see that. That s ubtle form of recognition does distort, I see 
that. You say all these inte rferences of thought are a waste of energy. You say 
observe without any form of recognition, condemnat ion, judgement; observe 
without naming, for that naming, recogn ition, condemnation  are a waste of 
energy. That can be logically and actua lly understood. Then there is the next 
point which is the division, th e separateness, or, rather, as  you have often put it in 
your talks, the space that  exists between the observe r and the observed which 
creates duality; you say that  this also is a waste of  energy and brings about 
conflict. I find everything you say logical bu t I find it extraordinarily difficult to 
remove that space, to bring about harmony between the observer and the 
observed. How is this to be done?   138     Krishnamurti: There is no how. The how means a system, a method, a 
practice which becomes mech anical. Again we have to be rid of the significance 
of the word "how".  
     Questioner: Is it possible? I know the word possible implie s a future, an effort, 
a striving to bring about harmony, but one  must use certain words. I hope we can 
go beyond those words, so is it possib le to bring about a union between the 
observer and the observed?  
     Krishnamurti: The observer is al ways casting its shad ow on the thing it 
observes. So one must under stand the structur e and the nature of the observer, 
not how to bring about a union between  the two. One must understand the 
movement of the obse rver and in that understanding  perhaps the observer comes 
to an end. We must examine what the observer is: it is the past with all its 
memories, conscious and unconscious, its racial inheritance, its accumulated 
experience which is called kn owledge, its reactions. Th e observer is really the 
conditioned entity. He is the one who asserts that he is, and I am. In protecting 
himself, he resists, dominates, seeking comfort and security. The observer then 
sets himself apart as something different fr om that which he observes, inwardly or 
outwardly. This brings about a duality and from this duality t here is conflict, which 
is the wastage of energy. To be aware of the observer , his movement, his self-
centred activity, his assertions, his prej udices, one must be aware of all these 
unconscious movements which build the separatist feeling that he is different. It 
must be observed without an y form of evaluation, without like and dislike; just 
observe it in daily life, in its relationships. When this observation is clear, isn't 
there then a freedom from the observer?  
     Questioner: You are saying, sir, that  the observer is really the ego; you are 
saying that as long as the ego exists, he must resist, di vide, separate, for in this 
separation, this division, he feels alive. It  gives him vitality to resist, to fight, and 
he has become accustomed to that battle; it is his wa y of living. Are you not  139saying that this ego, this "I", must diss olve through an observation in which there 
is no sense of like or dislike, no opini on or judgement, but only the observing of 
this "I" in action? But can su ch a thing really take place?  Can I look at myself so 
completely, so truly, without distortion? You say that when  I do look at myself so 
clearly then the "I" has no mo vement at all. And you say th is is part of meditation? 
Krishnamurti: Of course. This is meditation.  
     Questioner: This observation surely  demands extraordinary self-discipline.  
     Krishnamurti: What do you mean by self-discipline? Do you mean disciplining 
the self by putting him in a strait-jacke t, or do you mean lear ning about the self, 
the self that asserts, that do minates, that is am bitious, violent and so on - learning 
about it? The learning is, in itself, discipline. The word discipline means to learn 
and when there is learning, not accumulating, when th ere is actual learning, 
which needs attention, that learning brings about its own responsibility, its own 
activity, its own dimensions: so there is no discipline as some thing imposed upon 
it. Where there is learning there is no imit ation, no conformity, no authority. If this 
is what you mean by the word  discipline, then surely t here is freedom to learn?  
     Questioner: You are taking me to o far and perhaps too deeply, and I can't 
quite go with you where this le arning is concerned. I see very clearly that the self 
as the observer must come to an end. It is logically so, and there must be no 
conflict: that is very clear. But you are saying that this very observation is learning 
and in learning there is always accumulation; this accumulation becomes the 
past. Learning is an additive  process, but you are appare ntly giving it a different 
meaning altogether. From what I have unde rstood you are saying  that learning is 
a constant movement without accumulation . Is that so? Can learning be without 
accumulation?  
     Krishnamurti: Learning is its own action. What generally  happens is that 
having learnt - we act upon what we have  learnt. So there is division between the 
past and action, and hence there is a conflict between what should be and what  140is, or what has been and wh at is. We are saying that there can be action in the 
very movement of learning: that is, learni ng is doing; it is not a question of having 
learnt and then acting. This is very important to understa nd because having 
learnt, and acting from that accumulation, is the very nature of the "me", the "I", 
the ego or whatever name one likes to give  it. The "I" is the very essence of the 
past and the past impinges on the present and so on into the future. In this there 
is constant division. Where there is lear ning there is a consta nt movement; there 
is no accumulation which can become the "I".  
     Questioner: But in the technologi cal field there must be accumulated 
knowledge. One can't fly the Atlantic or run a car, or even do most of the ordinary 
daily things with out knowledge.  
     Krishnamurti: Of course not, sir; su ch knowledge is absolu tely necessary. But 
we are talking about the psychological fiel d in which the "I" operates. The "I" can 
use technological knowledge  in order to achieve so mething, a position or 
prestige; the "I" can use that knowledge to function, but if in  functioning the "I" 
interferes, things begin to go wrong, fo r the "I", through technical means, seeks 
status. So the "I" is not conc erned merely with knowledge in  scientific fields; it is 
using it to achieve something else. It is  like a musician who uses the piano to 
become famous. What he is concerned wi th is fame and not the beauty of the 
music in itself or for itself. We are not saying that we must get rid of technological 
knowledge; on the contrary, the more technological know ledge there is the better 
living conditions will be. But the moment the "I" uses it, th ings begin to go wrong.  
     Questioner: I think I begin to unde rstand what you are saying. You are giving 
quite a different meaning and dimension to the word learning, which is 
marvellous. I am beginning to grasp it. You are saying that meditation is a 
movement of learning and in that there is freedom to learn about everything, not 
only about meditation, but about the way one lives, drives, eats, talks, everything.   141     Krishnamurti: As we said, the esse nce of energy is meditation. To put it 
differently - so long as ther e is a meditator there is no meditation. If he attempts 
to achieve a state described by othe rs, or some flash of experience....  
     Questioner: If I may in terrupt you, sir, are you saying that learning must be 
constant, a flow, a line without any break, so that learning and action are one, or 
a constant movement? I do n't know what word to use, but I am sure you 
understand what I mean. Th e moment there is a brea k between learning, action 
and meditation, that break is a disharmony , that break is conflict. In that break 
there is the observer and the observed and hence the whole wastage of energy; 
is that what you are saying?  
     K r i s h n a m u r t i :  Y e s ,  t h a t  i s  w h a t  w e  mean. Meditation is not a state; it is a 
movement, as action is a movement. And as we said just now, when we separate 
action from learning, then the observer comes between the learning and the 
action; then he becomes impo rtant; then he uses action and learning for ulterior 
motives. When this is very clearly unde rstood as one harmon ious movement of 
acting, of learning, of meditation, there is  no wastage of ener gy and this is the 
beauty of meditation. There is only one movement. Learni ng is far more important 
than meditation or action. To learn ther e must be complete freedom, not only 
consciously but deeply, inward ly - a total freedom. And in freedom there is this 
movement of learning, ac ting, meditating as a harm onious whole. The word 
whole not only means health but holy. So learning is holy, acting is holy, meditation is holy. This is really a sacred thing and the beauty is  in itself and not 
beyond it.   142Ending Thought  
 Questioner: I wonder what you really mean by ending th ought. I talked to a 
friend about it and he said it is some kind of oriental  nonsense. To him thought is 
the highest form of intelligence and action, the very salt of lif e, indispensable. It 
has created civilization,  and all relationship is based on  it. All of us accept this, 
from the greatest thinker to the humblest labourer. When we don't think we sleep, 
vegetate or daydream; we are vacant, dull and unprod uctive, whereas when we 
are awake we are thin king, doing, livi ng, quarrelling: these ar e the only two states 
we know. You say, be beyond  both - beyond thought an d vacant inactivity. What 
do you mean by this?  
     Krishnamurti: Very simply put, thou ght is the response of memory, the past. 
The past is an infinity or a second ago. When thou ght acts it is th is past which is 
acting as memory, as experie nce, as knowledge,  as opportunity. A ll will is desire 
based on this past and directed towards pleasure or  the avoidance of pain. When 
thought is functioning it is th e past, therefore there is no new living at all; it is the 
past living in the present, modifying itself  and the present. So there is nothing 
new in life that way, and when something new is to be found there must be the 
absence of the pas t, the mind must no t be cluttered up with thought, fear, 
pleasure, and everything else. Only when the mind is unclu ttered can the new 
come into being, and for this reason we say that thought must be still, operating 
only when it has to - objectively, efficientl y. All continuity is thought; when there is 
continuity there is nothin g new. Do you see how import ant this is? It's really a 
question of life itself. Either you live in th e past, or you live tota lly differently: that 
is the whole point.  
     Questioner: I think I do see what yo u mean, but how in the world is one to end 
this thought? When I listen to the blackbir d there is thought telling me instantly it 
is the blackbird; when I walk down the st reet thought tells me  I am walking down 
the street and tells me all I recognise and see; when I play with the notion of not  143thinking it is again thought that plays this game. All meanin g and understanding 
and communication are thought. Even when I am not co mmunicating with 
someone else I am doing so with mysel f. When I am awake, I think, when I am 
asleep I think. The whole structure of my being is thou ght. Its roots lie far deeper 
than I know. All I think an d do and all I am is though t, thought creating pleasure 
and pain, appetites, longings, resolutions, conclusions, hopes, fears and 
questions. Thought commits murder and thought forgiv es. So how can one go 
beyond it? Isn't it thought again which seeks to go beyond it?  
     Krishnamurti: We both said, when thought is still, some thing new can be. We 
both saw that point clearly an d to understand it clearly is the ending of thought.  
     Questioner: But that un derstanding is also thought.  
     Krishnamurti: Is it? You assume th at it is thought, but is it, actually? 
Questioner: It is a mental movement with  meaning, a communication to oneself.  
     Krishnamurti: If it is a communi cation to oneself it is thought. But is 
understanding a mental mo vement with meaning?  
     Questioner: Yes it is.  
     Krishnamurti: The meaning of the wo rd and the understanding of that meaning 
is thought. That is necessary  in life. There thought must function efficiently. It is a 
technological matter. But you are not aski ng that. You are a sking how thought, 
which is the very movement of life as yo u know it, can come to an end. Can it 
only end when you di e? That is really your question, isn't it?  
     Questioner: Yes.  
     Krishnamurti: That is the right ques tion. Die! Die to the past, to tradition.  
     Questioner: But how?   144     Krishnamurti: The brain is the s ource of thought. The brain is matter and 
thought is matter. Can t he brain - with all its reactions and its immediate 
responses to every challenge and demand - can that brain be very still? It is not a 
question of ending thought, but of whether the brain can be completely still. Can it 
act with full capacity when necessary and otherwise be still? This stillness is not 
physical death. See wh at happens when the brain is  completely still. See what 
happens. Questioner: In that space there was a blackbird, the green tree, the 
blue sky, the man hammering next door, the sound of th e wind in the trees and 
my own heartbeat, the total quietnes s of the body. That is all.  
     Krishnamurti: If there was recognition of the blackbird sing ing, then the brain 
was active, was interpreting . It was not still. This r eally demands tremendous 
alertness and discipline, the watching th at brings its own discipline, not imposed 
or brought about by your un conscious desire to achieve a result or a pleasurable 
new experience. Therefore during the day thought must  operate effectively, 
sanely, and also watch itself.  
     Questioner: That is easy,  but what about going beyond it?  
     Krishnamurti: Who is asking this qu estion? Is it the desire to experience 
something new or is it the enquiry? If it is the enquiry, then you must enquire and 
investigate the wh ole business of thinki ng and be completely fa miliar with it, know 
all its tricks and subtleties. If you have done this you will know that the question of 
going beyond thought is an empty one. Going beyond thought is knowing what 
thought is.   145The New Human Being  
 Questioner: I am a reformer, a soci al worker. Seeing the extraordinary 
injustice there is in the world my whole life has been dedicated to reform. I used 
to be a Communist but I can't go along wi th Communism any mo re, it has ended 
in tyranny. Neverthel ess, I am still dedicated to reforming society so that man can 
live in dignity, beauty and freedom, and realize the potential which nature seems 
to have given him, and wh ich he himself seems always to have stolen from his 
fellow man. In America there is a certain kind of freedom, and yet standardization 
and propaganda are very strong there - all the mass media exert a tremendous 
pressure on the mind. It seems that the powe r of television, this  mechanical thing 
that man has invent ed, has developed its own perso nality, its own will, its own 
momentum; and though prob ably nobody - perhaps not ev en any one group - is 
deliberately using it to influence society,  its trend shapes the very souls of our 
children. And this is the same in vary ing degrees in all democracies. In China 
there seems to be no hope at  all for the dignity or free dom of man, while in India 
the government is weak, corr upt and inefficient. It seems to me that all the social 
injustice in the world absolutely must be changed. I want passionately to do 
something about it, yet I don't know where to begin to tackle it.  
     Krishnamurti: Reform needs further reform, and this is an endless process. So 
let us look at it differently. Let us put aside the whole thought of reform; let us 
wipe it out of our blood. Let us completely forget this idea of wanting to reform the 
world. Then let us see actua lly what is happening, ri ght throughout the world. 
Political parties always ha ve a limited programme wh ich, even if fulfilled, 
invariably brings about mischief, which then  has to be corrected once again. We 
are always talking about political action  as being a most important action, but 
political action is not the way. Let us put it out of our minds. All social and 
economic reforms come under this category. Then ther e is the religious formula 
of action based on belief, idealism, dogm atism, conformity to some so-called  146divine recipe. In this is involved au thority and acceptance, obedience and the 
utter denial of freedom. Though religions talk  of peace on earth they contribute to 
the disorder because they are a factor of division. Also the c hurches have always 
taken some political stand in times of crisis , so they are really political bodies, and 
we have seen that all political action is  divisive. The churches have never really 
denied war: on the contrary they have waged war.  So when one puts aside the 
religious recipes, as one puts  aside the political formulas  - what is left, and what 
is one to do? Naturally civic order must be maintained: you have to have water in 
the taps. If you destroy civic order you have  to start again from the beginning. So, 
what is one to do?  
     Questioner: That is what  I am actually asking you.  
     Krishnamurti: Be concerned with radi cal change, with total revolution. The only 
revolution is the revolution between man and man, be tween human bei ngs. That 
is our only concern. In th is revolution there are no bl ueprints, no ideologies, no 
conceptual utopias. We must ta ke the fact of the actual relationship between men 
and change that radically. That  is the real thing. And this revolution must be 
immediate, it must not take time. It is not achieved through evolution, which is 
time.  
     Questioner: What do you mean? A ll historical changes have taken place in 
time; none of them has been immediate. You are proposing something quite 
inconceivable.  
     Krishnamurti: If you take time to  change, do you supp ose that life is in 
suspension during the time it takes to ch ange? It isn't in su spension. Everything 
you are trying to change is being modified and perpet uated by the environment, 
by life itself. So ther e is no end to it. It is like tryi ng to clean the water in a tank 
which is constantly being  refilled with dirty wate r. So time is out.   147     Now, what is to bring about this ch ange? It cannot be will, or determination, or 
choice, or desire, because a ll these are part of the enti ty that has to  be changed. 
So we must ask what actually is po ssible, without the action of will and 
assertiveness which is always  the action of conflict.  
     Questioner: Is there any action which is not the action of will and 
assertiveness?  
     Krishnamurti: Instead of asking this question let us go much deeper. Let us 
see that actually it is only the action of will and assertivene ss that needs to be 
changed at all, beca use the only mischief in rela tionship is conflict, between 
individuals or within indivi duals, and conflict is will and assertiveness. Living 
without such action does not mean that we live like vegetabl es. Conflict is our 
main concern. All the social  maladies you mentioned ar e the projection of this 
conflict in the heart of ea ch human being. The only po ssible change is a radical 
transformation of yourself in  all your relationships, not  in some vague  future, but 
now.  
     Questioner: But how can I completely  eradicate this conf lict in myself, this 
contradiction, this resistance, this c onditioning? I understand what you mean 
intellectually, but I can only change when I feel it passionately, and I don't feel it 
passionately. It is merely an idea to me; I don't see it with my heart. If I try to act on this intellectual understanding I am in conflict with another, deeper, part of 
myself.  
     Krishnamurti: If you really see this  contradiction passiona tely, then that very 
perception is the revolution. If you see in yourself this division between the mind 
and the heart, actually see it, not conceive of it theo retically, but s ee it, then the 
problem comes to an end. A man who is  passionate about the world and the 
necessity for change, must be free from po litical activity, religious conformity and 
tradition - which means, free from the weight of time, free from the burden of the  148past, free from all the action of will: this is the new human being . This only is the 
social, psychological, and even the political revolution.  
 